https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform
CIS Construction Industry Scheme (CIS) post April 2007, showing how payments are taxed from 6 April 2007 Contents CISR10000 The Scheme: contents CISR20000 Authenticate customer: contents CISR30000 Register and maintain contractor: contents CISR40000 Register and maintain subcontractor: contents CISR50000 Verify subcontractor: contents CISR60000 Monthly returns and the End of Year (EOY) Process: contents CISR70000 Deductions: contents CISR80000 Compliance: contents CISR90000 View Customer and Record Contact: contents CISR90600 Action guide contents CISR91000 Office Manager Guide: contents CISR92000 Procedures in NIC&EO PAYE Employer Office, Longbenton: contents CISR95000 Worklists: contents CISR96000 Glossary and list of CIS forms: contents CISR97000 Who to contact for more information: contents Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr10000
CISR10000 - The Scheme: contents CISR11000 Overview: contents CISR12000 Contractors: contents CISR13000 Subcontractors: contents CISR14000 Construction operations: contents CISR15000 Payments: contents CISR16000 Primary legislation: contents CISR17000 Secondary legislation: contents CISR18000 Miscellaneous: contents CISR19000 Agent guidance: contents Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr11010
CISR11010 - The Scheme: overview: introduction This section gives a brief outline of the new Construction Industry Scheme (CIS). It also defines certain terms that are used in relation to the Scheme and the arrangements for the taxation of payments made from 6 April 2007 by businesses and other concerns in the construction industry. The new Scheme takes over from the ‘old’ Scheme that was in operation from1 August 1999 until it ceased on 5 April 2007. . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr11020
CISR11020 - The Scheme: overview: broad outline of the Scheme Businesses in the construction industry are known as contractors and subcontractors. They may include companies, partnerships and self-employed individuals. The legislation gives the terms 'contractor' and 'subcontractor' special meaning as described below: Contractors A contractor is a business or other concern that pays subcontractors for construction work. Contractors may be construction companies and building firms, but may also be Government Departments, local authorities, and many other businesses that are normally known in the industry as ‘clients’. Non-construction businesses or other concerns are counted as contractors if their expenditure on construction operations is £3 million or more in any rolling 12 month period. Non-construction businesses or other concerns that spend less than £3 million in any 12 month rolling period on construction work, and private householders, are not counted as contractors so are not covered by the Scheme. There is more information about contractors at CISR12000 onwards. Construction Operations Contractors pay subcontractors for 'construction operations'. Some businesses may act solely as contractors or as subcontractors, but many act as both. This means they pay businesses below them and receive payments from a main contractor above them in a chain. You should refer to CISR14000 onwards for more details of construction operations and the scope of the Scheme. Further details can also be found in Appendices A to C of the booklet CIS340 - 'Construction Industry Scheme. Guide for contractors and subcontractors'. Subcontractors Subcontractors are those businesses that carry out building work, known as 'construction operations' for contractors within the United Kingdom. You should refer to CISR13000 onwards for more details of subcontractors and their role in the Scheme. Just because someone is registered on CIS, it does not follow that they are always self-employed. It is the contractor's responsibility to establish whether, in relation to a particular job or contract, the person is employed or self-employed. If they are employed, the PAYE system must be operated. The contractor should consult the CIS Helpline and/or the HMRC website if there is any doubt about this. CIS Helpline on 0300 200 3210 CIS Website at www.hmrc.gov.uk/cis The Scheme The Construction Industry Scheme is aimed at preventing evasion of tax by subcontractors working in the industry and who are unknown to HMRC. The essence of the Scheme is that deductions are made at one of two prescribed rates from payments made to subcontractors engaged in construction operations carried out within the United Kingdom. There is, however, an important let-out under FA04/S60. Under this provision, subcontractors who satisfy certain conditions and whom HMRC has good reason to believe will pay tax on their profits through the normal processes are able to receive payments due to them in full. Such subcontractors are referred to as 'Gross Payment subcontractors'. Those subcontractors who do not meet the conditions to be paid gross are still expected to make themselves known to HMRC and register to be paid under deduction. Those subcontractors are referred to as 'Net Payment subcontractors' or 'subcontractors paid under deduction'. In addition to Gross Payment and Net Payment subcontractors, there are those subcontractors who have failed to register at all for the new Scheme. These subcontractors are known as 'un-matched' or 'un-registered' subcontractors. Un-matched subcontractors have deductions made from their payments at a higher rate until such time as they can be verified successfully. See CISR40000 onwards for more information on the subcontractor registration process. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr11030
CISR11030 - The Scheme: overview: making scheme payments to registered subcontractors paid under deduction at the standard rate Before making a payment to a subcontractor, the contractor should first ensure that the contract with the subcontractor is properly one of self-employment. The contractor must then verify the subcontractor, where the contractor needs to do this (See CISR51000 for more guidance on verification). On making payment, the contractor should then calculate and make the appropriate deduction from the payment to the subcontractor, and record details of the payment, materials and CIS deduction made. Within 14 days of the end of the tax month in which the payment, or payments, were made, the contractor must give a ‘payment and deduction statement’ to the subcontractor, showing how much has been paid and how much was deducted for the tax month just ended. This statement can be issued for each separate payment where it is more convenient for the contractor to do so - but there must be at least one statement for each month in which the subcontractor receives a payment. See CISR12160 for more details about the statement of deduction) pay over the sums deducted to HMRC. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr11040
CISR11040 - The Scheme: overview: making scheme payments to un-matched subcontractors paid under deduction at the higher rate An un-matched subcontractor is one that the contractor is unable to verify with HMRC. Generally, this will be where the subcontractor has failed to register for the Scheme but quite often it will also include situations where the subcontractor has given inaccurate information to the contractor. Where this has happened, it may lead to the contractor being unable to verify the subcontractor with HMRC simply because we cannot identify the subcontractor on our systems. Before making any payment to the subcontractor the contractor should, after first being satisfied that the contract with the subcontractor is properly one of self-employment attempt to verify the subcontractor (See CISR50000 for more guidance on verification). Where the subcontractor cannot be verified - for whatever reason, we will tell the contractor that the subcontractor is ‘un-matched’ and that the contractor must make a deduction at the higher rate from that subcontractor’s payments. A special reference number will be given to the contractor to enable future identification of this transaction by the subcontractor. On making payment, the contractor should calculate and make the appropriate deduction from the payment to the subcontractor (a deduction at the higher rate in this example), and record details of the payment, materials and CIS deduction made. Within 14 days of the end of the tax month in which the payment or payments were made, the contractor must give a ‘payment and deduction statement’ to the subcontractor, showing how much has been paid how much has been deducted in the tax month, and the ‘un-matched’ verification number given to the contractor during the verification process. (This statement can be issued for each separate payment where it is more convenient for the contractor to do so, as long as there is at least one statement for each tax month in which payment has been made) pay over to HMRC the sums deducted. See CISR12160 for more information about the subcontractor’s payment and deduction statement. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr11050
CISR11050 - The Scheme: overview: making scheme payments to subcontractors with gross payment status Just because someone holds gross payment status it does not automatically follow that they are self-employed. It is the contractor’s responsibility to establish whether, inrelation to a particular job or contract, the person is employed or self-employed. If the subcontractor is employed, the PAYE system must be operated. The contractor should consult the CIS Helpline or the HMRC website if there is any doubt. Before a contractor makes a payment to a subcontractor without deduction, the contractor must decide whether the verification process needs to be undertaken in order to determine what payment status may be used in paying the subcontractor. The Verification process is explained in detail at CISR50000 onwards. Failure to make the necessary checks may result in the contractor becoming liable for the deductions that should have been made and/or the withdrawal of the contractor’s own gross payment status (where the contractor has gross payment status as a subcontractor). If the contractor determines that verification is necessary, this process should be undertaken to confirm the payment method that must be used in paying the subcontractor. Where verification was not necessary, payment may be made without deduction but only where this was how the subcontractor was paid last time and there has been no notification from HMRC since then stating that payments to this particular subcontractor must now be made under deduction. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr11060
CISR11060 - The Scheme: overview: what about employees? The Scheme applies to workers who, for particular contracts, are self-employed and are not employees subject to PAYE. Employment status depends on general law. Although the contractor may seek your advice or that of the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) it is for the contractor to decide this when engaging the subcontractor. The fact that the subcontractor is already registered for CIS, for either gross or net payment, is irrelevant in deciding the issue. It is the terms of the particular engagement which matter in reaching a decision as to whether or not payments are to be treated as caught by the Scheme or subject to PAYE. The Scheme applies only where there is a contract between a contractor and a subcontractor that is not a contract of employment. Where a contract of employment exists, the subcontractor is an employee and will continue to be liable to tax on employment income through the PAYE system.Contractor enquiries on status When giving advice to contractors on the operation of the Scheme the question of whether an individual is an employee of the contractor should not be overlooked. You should initially refer the contractor to the HMRC factsheet ES/FS1 ‘Are your workers employed or self employed for Tax and National Insurance contributions’, available on SEES. More detailed advice for contractors is also available at . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr11070
CISR11070 - The Scheme: overview: legislation The Construction Industry Scheme legislation provides, from 6 April 2007, for the taxation of certain payments made by contractors to subcontractors in the construction industry. The purpose of the Scheme is to limit the evasion of tax by subcontractors, all of whom should register with HMRC if they want to be paid without having a deduction at the higher rate made from their payments. The statutory authorities for these arrangements are contained in - FA04/S57-77 and FA04/SCH11 and 12, and - SI2005/2045. The main change under the new Scheme that started on 6 April 2007 is the removal of the following documents registration cards - CIS4(P) and CIS4(T) tax certificates - CIS5, CIS5(Partner) and CIS6, and vouchers - CIS23, CIS24 and CIS25. Instead, subcontractors engaged in construction operations in the UK need to register with HMRC to be paid under deduction at the standard rate or, where the subcontractor meets the conditions under the statutory tests, to be paid gross, that is without any deductions being made from their payments. Like the Scheme it replaces, the new Scheme only permits gross payment to those applicants who pass the business test have a turnover above a certain level (see CISR44000 onwards for details of the Turnover Test), and are able to pass the compliance requirements (See CISR46000 onwards for details of the compliance test). The introduction of a new monthly return for completion by contractors replaces the old voucher system. See CISR60000 onwards for more details of the monthly return. The legislation applies only where there is a contract between a contractor and a subcontractor that is not a contract of employment. Where a contract of employment exists, the subcontractor is an employee and will continue to be liable to tax on employment income through the PAYE system. When giving advice to contractors on the operation of the Scheme, the question of whether an individual is an employee of the contractor should not be overlooked. You should initially refer the contractor to the HMRC factsheet ES/FS1 ‘Are your workers employed or self employed for Tax and National Insurance contributions’ available from the GOV.UK website, containing general guidance on employment status. More detailed advice for contractors is also available on the HMRC website at https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/employed-or-self-employed A section dedicated to the legislative background for CIS can be found at CISR16000 onwards for the primary legislation and at CISR17000 onwards for the secondary legislation (the Regulations). Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr11080
CISR11080 - The Scheme: overview: what is covered by the Scheme? The Scheme applies to all construction work carried out in the UK, including jobs such as: construction alterations repairs extensions demolition dismantling. Refer to CISR14000 onwards for more information on the definition of construction operations. Those details can also be found in Appendices A to C of the booklet CIS340 - ‘Construction Industry Scheme. Guide for contractors and subcontractors’. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr11090
CISR11090 - The Scheme: overview: what is not covered by the Scheme? You must remember that the Construction Industry Scheme does not apply to payments for work done outside the UK. ‘Outside the UK’, in this context, also means the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man. You should refer to the separate section at CISR14000 for details of those construction operations that are excluded from the Scheme. A summary of this information can be found in Appendices A to C of the booklet CIS340 - ‘Construction Industry Scheme. Guide for contractors and subcontractors’. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr11100
CISR11100 - The Scheme: overview: definitions and explanations of CIS terms What is ‘a payment’? A payment is anything paid out by the contractor, for example, cash, cheque or credit. An advance, a ‘sub’ or a loan is a credit and therefore a payment. This applies whether or not the payment is made directly to the subcontractor. Where a payment is made to someone other than the subcontractor you should refer to the detailed guidance at CISR15050 onwards. Guidance on this is also available in paragraphs 6.4 to 6.6 of the booklet CIS340 - ‘Construction Industry Scheme. Guide for contractors and subcontractors’. What is ‘not a payment’? A ‘payment’ under the Scheme does not include the cost of materials, VAT, or an amount in respect of the Construction Industry Training Board (CITB) levy. Where a payment is made under deduction, and depending on the terms of the contract, the deduction should also apply to payments for subsistence and/or travelling expenses. What is the ‘deduction’? The term deduction means the amount that a contractor has to withhold, where appropriate, from a payment made to a subcontractor, on account of the subcontractor’s tax and class 4 NICs liability, or other, usually PAYE liabilities, where the subcontractor is a company. The deduction may be at the standard rate of 20% or at the ‘un-matched’ subcontractor rate of 30% depending on the circumstances, as described in the following paragraphs. Rates of deduction There are two rates of deduction depending on whether or not the subcontractor can be matched during the verification process by the contractor who is making the payment. The standard rate of deduction, for registered and verified subcontractors, from 6April 2007 is 20%. The higher rate of deduction, for subcontractors who are not registered for CIS, or who cannot be matched during the verification process, is currently 30%. What is a ‘contract’? A contract means any legally binding agreement or arrangement and is usually constituted through the process of ‘offer’, ‘acceptance’ and ‘communication of acceptance’ all of which may be achieved by word of mouth as well as in a written document. There is a standard form of contract for labour-only subcontractors drawn up by the Joint Contracts Tribunal (JCT) for the construction industry. What are ‘construction operations’? The term ‘construction operations’ is defined in FA04/S74, which is reproduced in Appendix B of the booklet CIS340 - ‘Construction Industry Scheme. Guide for contractors and subcontractors’. As a general guide, the term construction operations covers almost anything that is done to a permanent or temporary building, structure, work or civil engineering or installation in the United Kingdom or within its territorial waters (up to the 12 mile limit) including construction alterations repairs extensions demolition dismantling. Anything done on a construction site in connection with construction work and under contract to the owner, client, main contractor or a subcontractor is likely to be a construction operation. The exceptions are types of work that are clearly not construction work, such as the running of site facilities such as canteens, hostels, offices, toilets and medical centres. The table shown at Appendix C in the booklet CIS340 - ‘Construction Industry Scheme. Guide for contractors and subcontractors’, is a list of construction operations and shows which types of construction work are within the scheme and which are not. The list cannot include every possible construction job. Remember that where a single contract relates to a mixture of jobs, all payments due under the contract are within the scheme, even if only one of the jobs is within the meaning of construction operations. If there is any doubt as to whether a particular type of work is to be treated as coming within the scope of the Scheme, the contractor or subcontractor concerned should initially contact the CIS Helpline for advice. CIS Helpline on 0300 200 3210. More detailed guidance can be found in the section dedicated to ‘Construction Operations’ at CISR14000 onwards. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12000
CISR12000 - The Scheme: contractors: contents CISR12010 Introduction CISR12020 Definition of contractor CISR12030 Businesses and individuals that are NOT contractors CISR12040 Mainstream contractors CISR12050 ‘Deemed’ contractors CISR12055 applying the statutory test for ‘deemed’ contractor” status CISR12056 Applying the statutory tests for ‘deemed’ contractor” status - Less than 3 years CISR12060 Businesses becoming ‘deemed’ contractors CISR12070 Ending of 'deemed' contractor status CISR12080 Property developers and property investment businesses CISR12090 Local authorities CISR12100 Schools CISR12110 Government departments CISR12120 NHS trusts CISR12130 Charities CISR12140 Construction expenditure CISR12150 Verifying subcontractors CISR12160 Subcontractor's payment and deduction statement CISR12170 Monthly returns CISR12180 Paying over deductions CISR12190 Multiple sites / schemes CISR12200 Production of records CISR12210 Review of business accounts CISR12220 Death of a contractor CISR12230 Scheme representatives CISR12240 Guidance for contractors Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12010
CISR12010 - The Scheme: contractors: introduction This section serves as an introduction to the section on contractors operating the Construction Industry Scheme. For more detailed coverage use the above ‘Menu’ link to the menu of information panels on particular subjects. The section explains the criteria for determining whether a business is a contractor under the Scheme and describes the obligations contractors have under the Scheme legislation. It also goes into detail on certain particular types of contractor. It does not cover procedures involved when contractors fail to fulfil any of the obligations described here. These are dealt with in the section at CISR80000 on Scheme compliance. Nor does it deal with the creation of contractor records on CIS. That is dealt with in the section on contractor records at CISR31000 . The term ‘contractor’ for the purposes of the Construction Industry Scheme is closely linked to the meaning of ‘construction operations’. Detail on what is meant by construction operations is covered at CISR14000 onwards and not in this section (see also the booklet CIS340 - ‘Construction Industry Scheme. Guide for contractors and subcontractors’). Since it is a descriptive section there are no action guides, only information panels. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12020
CISR12020 - The Scheme: contractors: definition of contractor The term contractor, for the purposes of the Construction Industry Scheme, is defined at FA04/s57 and s59. It is set out to include any subcontractor to a contract for construction operations who engages subcontractors to carry out any of that work (FA04/s57 (2)). any person carrying on a business which includes construction operations (FA04/s59 (1)(a)). These are known as ‘mainstream contractors’ in this guidance. any person carrying on a business, or certain bodies, whose expenditure on construction operations exceeds certain limits (FA04/s59 (1)(b)-(l)). These are known as ‘deemed contractors’ in this guidance. More detail on these is available in separate information panels in this section as follows Mainstream contractors CISR12040 Deemed contractors CISR12050 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12030
CISR12030 - The Scheme: contractors: businesses and individuals that are NOT contractors Under the Scheme, the following businesses and individuals are NOT contractors: Businesses or other concerns outside the mainstream construction industry whose average annual expenditure on construction work over the last rolling 12 month period does not exceed £3 million (See CISR12050 for more information about this). Householders that are having work done on their own homes, such as new house building, decoration, repairs or an extension. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12040
CISR12040 - The Scheme: contractors: mainstream contractors ‘Mainstream contractors’ are businesses that carry out construction work, or supply labour for carrying out construction work. They include the following construction businesses (including foreign businesses carrying out construction work in the UK) property developers or speculative builders erecting and altering buildings in order to make a profit. gang leaders organising labour for construction work. These businesses are liable to operate the Construction Industry Scheme whatever the level of their expenditure on construction operations (FA04/s59 (1)(a)). Any business which is registered as a subcontractor for the purposes of CIS and subcontracts elements of its work that come within the Scheme is acting as a contractor under CIS (FA04/s57 (2)). Construction businesses These are businesses whose activities consist of or include carrying out construction operations for other parties and which use subcontract labour for this purpose. Property developers and Property investment businesses See the separate guidance at CISR12080 Top of page Gang leaders Where a contractor negotiates with a gang leader to pay the gang-leader for work done by the gang and the gang leader shares out the money amongst the gang, the gang leader is a contractor for the other gang members and the original contractor only deals with one subcontractor; the gang leader. Top of page Labour agencies Generally labour agencies are not contractors under the scheme although they can be subcontractors. Since 6 April 1998 a labour agency that supplies workers to a contractor has been obliged under FA98/s55 to operate PAYE where the contract between the agency and the worker is a contract for services. This means that circumstances in which an agency has to operate the Construction Industry Scheme in the role of contractor are likely to be rare. However, some labour agencies do subcontract work on, often to single person companies, rather than directly employing the worker. In these cases, the labour agency will have to operate the scheme on the payment. Top of page Arms-Length Management Organisations An Arms-Length Management Organisation (ALMO) is a company set up by a local authority to manage or improve all or part of its housing stock. The company is owned and run by the local authority with ‘volunteer’ directors and operates under the terms of a management agreement between the local authority and the ALMO. ALMOs are treated as contractors by virtue of s59 (1)(a) in that they are carrying on a business that includes construction operations. Such a business is not a deemed contractor nor is it a Local Authority and it cannot avail itself of the small payments exemption allowed by SI2005/2045 reg 18. (See CISR15150 ). Any payment under the management agreement that passes between the Local Authority and the ALMO is not paid under a contract relating to construction operations and therefore CIS will not apply. Consequently it is unlikely that an ALMO will be a subcontractor unless they enter into contracts relating to construction operations with other concerns that are contractors. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12050
CISR12050 - The Scheme: contractors: ‘deemed’ contractors Under the Scheme, some businesses, public bodies and other concerns are deemed to be contractors. Sections FA04 /s59(1)(b) - (l) define those persons or bodies ‘deemed’ to be contractors within CIS and include the following businesses which do not include construction operations but which spend above a certain amount on construction operations. public bodies and other specified bodies which spend above a certain amount on construction operations. Businesses Only businesses are ’deemed’ to be contractors by FA04/s.59(1)(l). These will be non-construction businesses, such as large manufacturing concerns, department stores, breweries, banks, oil companies and property investors. The amount these businesses must spend on construction operations, to be considered deemed contractors, is set out at FA04/s59 (1) ‘ in any rolling one year period, the person’s expenditure on construction operations exceeds £3,000,000’. In addition the following types of business will also fall within the deemed contractor definition (FA04/s59(1)(b)); Utilities (gas, electricity, water etc.) Telecommunications Transport network & infrastructure The above is intended to be helpful. It is not, and should not be read as, an exhaustive list. Public bodies FA04/s59 (1) explicitly lists certain bodies and classes of body that are deemed to be contractors where they spend over a certain amount on construction operations. They are any public office or department of the Crown (including any Northern Ireland department and any part of the Scottish Administration) the Corporate Officer of the House of Lords, the Corporate Officer of the House of Commons and the Scottish Parliamentary Body any local authority any development corporation or new town commission the Commission for the New Towns the Secretary of State if the contract is made by him under Section 89 of the Housing Associations Act 1985 the Housing Corporation, a housing association, a housing trust, Scottish Homes and the Northern Ireland Housing Executive any NHS trust or Health and Social Services (HSS) trusts (but not including any NHS Foundation Trust) The amount these bodies must spend on construction operations to be considered deemed contractors is set out at FA04/s59 (2). This is an expenditure of £3 million or above in any 12 month rolling period. Regulation 22 The Scheme does not need to be applied to certain payments made by businesses brought into it by virtue of them spending £3 million or more on construction operations. This exemption to report these payments is described in much more detail at CISR15140 and the legislation is explained at CISR17230 . For guidance on where a business seeks to be de-registered because all its payments fall within the terms of this regulation, first see CISR15140 and then CISR12060 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12055
CISR12055 - The Scheme: contractors: applying the statutory test for ‘deemed’ contractor” status Section 59(1)(l) Finance Act 2004 Where a business is not already a mainstream contractor via the provisions at section 59(1)(a) Finance Act 2004 (see CISR12040 ), then that business may instead be a “deemed contractor” if it satisfies the construction expenditure threshold tests contained within section 59(1)(l) Finance Act 2004. In this page of the manual we will concentrate on applying that test. Section 59(1)(l) FA 2004 states ‘ in the period of one year ending with that time, the person’s expenditure on construction operations exceeds £3,000,000.’ In applying this test, the business must at any time on a rolling basis (for example – day-to-day, month-to-month) calculate all of the construction expenditure it has incurred over a 12-month period. If the expenditure over those 12-months is over £3 million, then that business becomes a deemed contractor from that date and is therefore required to register as a contractor within the Construction Industry Scheme. When assessing the deemed contractor threshold HMRC looks at the person’s expenditure on construction operations included in the contract payment. For these purposes, the term ‘expenditure’ means expenditure excluding VAT, that is before the application of VAT. For example, if the contract price is £1 million + VAT the expenditure figure to be taken into account for the purpose of the test is £1 million. Example 1 Company A does not ordinarily operate in the construction industry and is therefore not a mainstream contractor. Over recent months it has incurred construction expenditure when engaging 3rd parties to undertake construction work, Company A must now review any construction payments to see if it reaches the £3 million qualifying construction spend threshold within the previous 12-month period; if it does, then Company A becomes a deemed contractor. Company A monitors its construction payments over the previous 12 month period spanning 06/01/2020 to 05/01/2021, which are as follows: December 2020 indicates the cumulative total spend on construction is nearing the £3 million threshold and it would be prudent for Company A to begin the registration process at this point if further construction is to be undertaken. The deemed contractor threshold was exceeded when the January 2021 payment was made. Company A becomes a deemed contractor and is required to register as a contractor within CIS immediately. Similarly, a business may de-register from CIS if their construction spend falls below the £3 million threshold in the previous rolling 12-month period and no further construction by the business is expected to be undertaken which would exceed the £3 million threshold. If you wish to de-register from the CIS you will need to contact the CIS Helpline on 0330 200 3210. If construction work should decrease or cease for short periods of time HMRC recommends that businesses do not de-register from CIS but use the facility to have a temporary period of inactivity applied. You can find more guidance on this process at CISR61280 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12056
CISR12056 - The Scheme: contractors: Applying the statutory tests for ‘deemed’ contractor” status (for businesses that have traded for less than 3 years). Page archived. New legislation. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12060
CISR12060 - The Scheme: contractors: businesses becoming / de-registering as ‘deemed’ contractors Strictly, deemed contractor status applies to a business as soon as the necessary conditions apply ( CISR12050 ). However, some deemed contractors will only discover that they have deemed contractor status after the event. Furthermore, a business needs time to set up the systems necessary to apply CIS. As soon as you become aware that a business has become a deemed contractor you should agree an early date from which the business will undertake to comply with its contractor obligations. When doing this, you should allow the business sufficient time to set up the necessary internal procedures to operate the Scheme. A complex business with numerous branches and many small contracts may require several months to get organised. Even a small business will require a certain period of grace to make the necessary arrangements. Where appropriate, you should draw the attention of the deemed contractor to the small payment arrangements allowed for in SI2005/2045 reg 18. There is more on small payments arrangements at CISR15150 . Where you determine that a business is a deemed contractor you should follow the guidance in the section at CISR30000 to set up a contractor record on the CIS system. If, however, you have agreed a period of grace you should put your file on BF and take the necessary action once the period has passed. If a business that owns or leases a substantial amount of property does not reply to enquiries about its expenditure on construction operations, but accounts or returns over the last three years suggest that it may well be a ‘deemed contractor’, you should send a warning letter along the lines of the text set out at the bottom of this page. If no reply is received within one month you should set the business up as a contractor as indicated above. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Public bodies Special arrangements apply to setting up new public bodies to operate CIS. Consult the separate information panels listed below for these For more details including the strict definition of ‘deemed contractors’ you should refer to CISR12050 and (FA04/s59 (3)). Top of page Text of ‘warning letter’ I wrote to you on [insert date] enquiring about your business’s expenditure on construction operations. I need this information in order to determine whether you are liable to operate the Construction Industry Scheme. I have not received a reply to date. I must therefore assume that you are a contractor within the terms of Section 59(1)(l), Finance Act 2004. If I do not hear from you within the next month I shall expect you to begin applying the Construction Industry Scheme to payments made for construction operations three months from this date and I will arrange for the necessary literature to be issued to you in due course. Top of page Businesses seeking to de-register as contractors A business brought into the Scheme because it spends an average of £3million or more on construction operations (see CISR12050 ) may tell the department that it will only ever be making payments for construction operations that fall entirely within SI2005/2045 reg 22 - see CISR15140 and CISR17230 . As a result, it may ask to be de-registered from the Scheme as a contractor. Where you are satisfied that this is the case, you may take the necessary steps to cease the contractor’s record. It is important to note that it is the payment and not the business that is exempted by SI2005/2045 Reg 22. Where businesses defined by FA04/s59(1)(l) are allowed to effectively ‘de-register’ from CIS, this is on the clear understanding that: Any payments it makes under a contract relating to construction operations will always relate to property used for the purposes of the business, and The payments will not relate to payments for construction operations to property that the business intends to sell, let or hold as an investment Deemed contractors that have expenditure on construction operations in the normal course of their business, sometimes within CIS, and sometimes exempted by Reg 22, should continue to operate within the scheme. Where this is the case either nil returns or periods of inactivity (see CISR67000 ) should be filed as appropriate. On their monthly return the business can indicate that they do not anticipate making any construction payments for a period of up to six months and all future monthly returns will then be inhibited for the period they specified (see CISR67010 ). At the end of this period the business will get another monthly return and if they are still in the same position should once again indicate that they do not anticipate making construction payments for a further period of up to six months. This process can then continue indefinitely until such time as a payment within the Scheme is made by the business or they can confirm that they will definitely not be making any payments that fall out of the exemption afforded by SI2005/2045 reg 22 in which case you may wish to de-register them completely. If a business is de-registered in this way, you should inform it that the onus remains on the business telling us later if they do need to make any payments upon which CIS needs to be operated. In such circumstances, they will need to be set up as a contractor again. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12070
CISR12070 - The Scheme: contractors: ending of ‘deemed’ contractor status Once a business becomes a deemed contractor by virtue of FA04/s59 (1) it does not lose contractor status until expenditure on construction operations falls below the £3million threshold in the previous rolling 12 month period . Where a business claims that it is no longer a deemed contractor because less than £3million has been spent in the preceeding 12 months, the claim should be accepted with a minimum of checking. In this case you should follow the guidance at CISR31050 . (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12080
CISR12080 - The Scheme: contractors: property developers and property investment businesses Property developers Property developers are included within the meaning of mainstream contractors because their business activity is the creation of new buildings, or the renovation or conversion of existing buildings, or other civil engineering works. The same is true of a speculative builder. Property investment businesses A ‘property investment business’ is not the same thing as a ‘property developer’. A property investment business acquires and disposes of buildings for capital gain or uses the buildings for rental; it need not be involved in the construction, alteration, or extension of buildings. Even so, if its property estate is substantial enough, its expenditure on construction operations on refurbishment or general maintenance may well cause it to fall within the meaning of a ‘deemed contractor’ (see CISR12050 ). If its activities include the construction of an entirely new property or a redevelopment of a property, leading to change in its nature of use, for instance redeveloping an old hotel or offices into a block of flats, then that part of its activities will amount to property development, and it will be immediately within the scope of CIS as a mainstream contractor. This will apply even if the value or size of the property being developed is relatively small in relation to the rest of the property investor’s portfolio of properties. Example A property investment business acquires several properties which it intends to let, but before letting, refurbishment is required to bring the properties up to a suitable standard. In some instances, it can be more than the usual refurbishment, which is needed, for example a sprinkler or fire system or perhaps a structural survey identifies a new roof is necessary or works to comply with statutory requirements for health and safety or building regulations. For CIS purposes we would see this as the normal activities of a property investor. Where, however, the expenditure on such activities exceeds £3million in a rolling 12-month period then the threshold for deemed contractor status has been reached and CIS applies. Where the property investment business undertakes multiple or substantial contracts relating to construction operations for the purposes of development of one or more properties, you will need to decide if the nature of that business has now changed from “property investor” to “property developer”. In this case they would now be considered as mainstream contractors as the nature of their business has changed. Example The property investment business acquires a large, dilapidated building to add to its portfolio, and decides to convert the building into a series of flats which it will then individually let out. As a result, substantial development is required to the property to change the building to its new use. In respect of this type of development we would regard the property investment business as having taken on the mantle of a mainstream contractor as its business activity is now that of construction operations. Where, at a future date, the investment business reverts to property investment activities only, then their status as a deemed contractor should be applicable once again. If their expenditure is likely to remain below £3 million on a rolling 12-month period, then deregistration from CIS may be considered appropriate. However, where further property development is likely to be undertaken in the future, it may be more appropriate for the business to remain registered for CIS. Where property development appears to be a regular and substantial activity of any business purporting to be a property investment business, then they are likely to be a property developer and therefore a mainstream contractor within CIS. Guidance Referral Service: It is important that a business decides its CIS status before making payments to which the CIS could apply. If you are in doubt as to whether the work you are undertaking is that of a developer or an investor, you may call the CIS helpline on 0300 200 3210 and request to speak with a technician. The technician will provide you with a dedicated drop box link where you’ll be able to submit any information you want HMRC to review and provide advice on. Please note, any view provided by HMRC is in line with HMRC’s general policy on providing advice to taxpayers. The responsibility lies with the taxpayer to supply HMRC with all relevant facts and inform HMRC if those facts have materially changed. Further guidance can be found at https://www.gov.uk/guidance/when-you-can-rely-on-information-or-advice-provided-by-hm-revenue-and-customs . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12090
CISR12090 - The Scheme: contractors: local authorities CIS uses the definitions of local authorities set out at ICTA88/s842A. They include metropolitan, county, borough and district councils police and fire authorities parish, community and local councils. This list is not exhaustive. Local authorities are only required to operate CIS if their expenditure on construction operations exceeds the limits described in CISR12050 . In practice, most local authorities of any size will exceed those limits. You should note that Local Authorities are not able to make use of the provisions of SI2005/2045 reg 22, known as the ‘Own build’ regulation. This is because Regulation 22 specifically relates to ‘businesses’ of the type described at FA04/s59 (1)(l). (See CISR15140 for more information about Regulation 22). CIS administration The CIS system relies on interaction with other HMRC systems for maintenance of its records. The essential requirements for maintenance of a CIS record for a contractor are the existence of a record on the SA or COTAX system a record on the Employer Business Service (EBS) relating to a P(SC) or XP scheme. Since most local authorities have been operating the previous Schemes for many years there will already be a P(SC) scheme in operation for the authority’s employees and subcontractors. There will also be an EBS reference in existence and this scheme will continue to be managed by the Centralised Employers Team, NICEO. However, the programme of allocating UTRs when the COTAX and SA systems were set up did not cover local authorities. Special arrangements were made, therefore, to allocate UTRs centrally. This was done by South Wales Area (Service), formerly PD2, which set up SA records for all known local authorities. If you are now approached in connection with the creation of a new local authority, or the re-organisation of existing local authorities for which the Centralised Employers Team, NICEO manage one or more of the schemes, you should now liaise with the LLP, Team Mailbox (PT Operations) you should include details of the Local authority to be set up (name, full address, telephone number, type of business and start date of business), so that the LLP team can set this up on SA. Once set up the LLP team will email UTR back to Employer Office, to ensure that the necessary SA records are created and / or ceased and who will then notify the NICEO of the new SA reference to be entered on to the EBS record. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12100
CISR12100 - The Scheme: contractors: schools Under S36 of the School Standards and Framework Act 1998, a school’s governing body is a body corporate, a legal entity. However in spending its delegated budget, the governing body does so as the agent of the Local Education Authority (LEA). Before 1999-2000, Foundation schools (then known as Grant Maintained schools), were financed directly from the Department for Education and Employment (DfEE) and payments by those schools were not caught by the Scheme because the DfEE itself was not defined as a contractor by ICTA88/S560. Under funding arrangements set out at Section 49(5)(b) of the School Standards and Framework Act 1998, the budget shares of all schools, including foundation schools, remain the property of the maintaining Local Education Authority until spent. However, with the start of the new Scheme on 6 April 2007, SI2005/2045 reg 21. specifically excludes from the Scheme any payments made for construction operations by the governing body or head teacher of a maintained school. As such, the Scheme should not be operated in respect of such payments. Private schools For CIS purposes, private schools are treated in the same way as any other deemed contractor caught by FA04/s59 (1)(l). (See CISR12050 for more details on deemed contractors). Voluntary aided (VA) schools Voluntary Aided Schools are not treated as contractors for the purposes of FA04/s59 (1)(l) and do not have to operate the Scheme. Top of page ‘Free’ schools ‘Free’ schools were set up by the Academies Act 2010. They are not treated as contractors for the purposes of FA04/s59 (1)(l) and do not have to operate the Scheme as they hold charitable status and can therefore take advantage of SI2005/reg 24. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12110
CISR12110 - The Scheme: contractors: government departments All public offices or departments of the Crown (including any Northern Ireland department and any part of the Scottish Administration) are required to operate CIS as contractors where they spend over a certain amount on construction work (see CISR12050 ). Most government departments will be involved. This is provided for at FA04/s59 (1)(b) and covers both main government departments and their agencies. CIS administration The CIS system relies on interaction with other Revenue systems for maintenance of its records. The essential requirements for maintenance of a CIS record for a contractor are the existence of a record on the SA or COTAX system for the contractor a record on the Employer Business Service (EBS) relating to a P(SC) or XP scheme for the contractor. Since a government department or agency is an employer there will already be a P scheme in operation for its employees, an EBS reference will therefore exist. If the government department or agency is now engaging subcontractors the scheme type will need changing to ‘PSC’ in order that a contractor record is created on CIS However, government departments and agencies are not routinely allocated UTRs and SA records. Special arrangements were made, therefore, to allocate UTRs centrally. This was done by South Wales Area (Service), formerly PD2, which set up SA records for all government departments and agencies. If you receive any enquiries about setting up a SA record for a new government department or agency you should now liaise with the LLP Team Operations to ensure that the necessary SA records are created and / or ceased who will then notify the NICEO of the new SA reference to be entered on to the EBS record. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12120
CISR12120 - The Scheme: contractors: NHS trusts NHS Trusts are among the bodies named in FA04/s59 (1) as liable to operate the Construction Industry Scheme as contractors if they spend over a certain amount on construction work (see CISR12050 ). CIS administration The CIS system relies on interaction with other Revenue systems for maintenance of its records. The essential requirements for maintenance of a CIS record for a contractor are the existence of a record on the SA or COTAX system for the contractor (although the CI signal should still be set on an SA record, it has no use within CIS) a record on the Employer Business Service (EBS) relating to a P(SC) or XP scheme for the contractor. Since an NHS Trust is an employer there will already be a P scheme in operation in respect the Trust’s employees and so an EBS reference will exist. If the NHS Trust is now engaging subcontractors the scheme type will need changing to ‘PSC’ in order that a contractor record is created on CIS However, the programme of allocating UTRs when the COTAX and SA systems were set up did not cover NHS Trusts. Special arrangements were made, therefore, to allocate UTRs centrally. This was done by South Wales Area (Service), formerly PD2, which set up SA records for all known NHS Trusts. If you are approached in connection with the creation of a new NHS Trust, or the reorganisation of existing Trusts for which the Centralised Employers Team, NICEO manage one or more of the schemes, you should now liaise with LLP Team Operations to ensure that the necessary SA records are created and / or ceased and who will then notify the NICEO of the new SA reference to be entered on to the EBS record. NHS Foundation Trusts Where an NHS Foundation trust is set up, they are not treated as contractors for the purposes of FA04/s59 (1)(i) or (j) and therefore do not have to operate the Scheme. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12130
CISR12130 - The Scheme: contractors: charities From 6 April 2007, SI2005/2045 reg 24, specifically excludes from the Scheme any payments for construction operations where those payments are made by a charity. This exclusion does not extend to any trading arms that such charities may have. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12140
CISR12140 - The Scheme: contractors: construction expenditure When considering the amount of a business’s expenditure on construction operations the following points should be noted. UK operations For the purposes of CIS, ‘construction operations’ include only operations carried out in the UK and its territorial waters (treated as the twelve-mile limit). Only expenditure arising for work done within these limits should be taken into account. Repairs, maintenance and alterations Expenditure on construction operations may be on repairs and maintenance - normally charged in the profit and loss account alterations or other new work - normally shown in the balance sheet. Where the expenditure on repairs does not differentiate between repairs to property and repairs to plant and machinery it may be necessary to ask for an analysis to identify the portion relating to construction operations. Similarly, where the additions to property do not distinguish between new work and alterations commissioned by the business itself on one hand and the purchases of buildings on the other it may be necessary to ask for an approximate allocation of the expenditure. You need not subject the allocation provided to close scrutiny. The aim is to identify businesses that are clearly deemed contractors. You should exercise discretion, however, when asking for analyses of repairs or other expenditure. For example, a charge for repairs in the accounts of a manufacturing concern with a limited property estate can probably be regarded as substantially applying to its production machinery. Top of page Groups of companies Where the business under consideration is a company, the expenditure test should be applied to its own construction expenditure. The test should not be applied to a group of companies as a whole. Certain groups of companies concentrate their property service requirements on a single member company that deals with property transactions and maintenance for the rest of the group. Where this applies, and you conclude that the property company is a deemed contractor, expenditure on construction work placed through this company by other group members should be disregarded when considering whether each of the group members is a deemed contractor. This is so that the same expenditure is not counted twice. Top of page Company reconstructions without change of ownership Where one company transfers the whole or part of its trade to another company and CTA10/s940B applies to the transfer, all or some of the construction expenditure incurred by the first company is attributable to the second company in determining whether the latter is a deemed contractor. If the whole of the trade is transferred, all construction expenditure incurred by the first company is attributable to the second company. If only part of the trade is transferred, the construction expenditure attributable to the second company is proportional to the portion of the trade transferred. Any apportionment must be ‘just and reasonable’ and if the second company disputes the apportionment proposed by the Inspector it may appeal against the decision. This is provided for at FA04/s59 (4). Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12150
CISR12150 - The Scheme: contractors: verifying subcontractors SI2005/2045 reg 6, requires a contractor to verify with HMRC whether a subcontractor to whom the contractor is proposing to make a payment for construction operations is registered with HMRC for payment under deduction or for gross payment. The contractor does not have to verify every subcontractor. The general rule is that where a subcontractor has been included on a return by that contractor in the current tax year or in either of the previous two tax years, further verification is not necessary before making payment. From 6 April 2017 it will become mandatory to undertake all verifcations online. Special rules that applied for the first two years after 6 April 2007 The general rule is that where a subcontractor has been included on a contractor’s return within the current or two previous tax years the subcontractor does not have to be verified again. However, where the subcontractor was last included on a return under the old Scheme, that is, before 6 April 2007, certain transitional rules, set out at FA04/s77, applied. This meant that to avoid having to verify the subcontractor under the new Scheme, the contractor had to be satisfied that the subcontractor held a valid Tax Certificate or Registration Card at 5 April 2007. A simple way of looking at this is set out below. Essentially, a contractor did not have to verify any subcontractor where at the time the subcontractor was last included on a return, the contractor had seen at least one of the following a Registration Card CIS4(P), or a temporary Registration Card CIS4(T) with an expiry date of 04/2007 or later, or a Tax Certificate, CIS6 or CIS5, with an expiry date of 04/2007 or later. So, if the contractor last paid the subcontractor in August 2006 and the contractor’s records showed that the subcontractor held a CIS6 that was due to expire in September 2007, clearly the subcontractor had a valid Tax Certificate at 5 April 2007. In this case, the subcontractor could be paid under the new Scheme without the need to be verified and could also be paid gross as this was how they were last paid. Subcontractor did not show Tax Certificate or Registration Card valid at 5 April 2007. In those cases where the contractor only ever saw either a temporary Registration Card CIS4(T) or a Tax Certificate which, although valid at the time of payment, expired in March 2007 or earlier, verification was still necessary before making the first payment to the subcontractor under the new Scheme. So, if the contractor last paid the subcontractor under the old Scheme in September 2006 and only saw a CIS6, or a temporary CIS4(T), showing an expiry date of 10/2006 and had seen neither a CIS4(P) or a later CIS4(T) or tax certificate for this subcontractor, then verification was still necessary before making the first payment to the subcontractor under the new Scheme. Contractors that are companies within a group Contractors do not have to verify any subcontractors that have already been verified by other companies within the same group within the current or previous two tax years. Likewise, if verification is not necessary because the subcontractor was last paid within the current tax year, or the previous two, by another company in the group, this will mean that none of the companies within the group need to verify the subcontractor. Contractors using the HMRC Online filing application Since May 2016, the HMRC Online filing application has been removing the verification details from subcontractors that were last verified over two calendar years ago. This is an error and we are currently addressing this. If a contractor has included a subcontractor on their monthly return within the current or two previous tax years, further verification is not necessary before payment may be made. Where a contractor wishes to maintain subcontractor details on the HMRC Online filing application, they should re-verify the subcontractor using the online application if it requests them to do so. We shall fix this as soon as possible. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12160
CISR12160 - The Scheme: contractors: subcontractor's payment and deduction statement Payment and deduction statement Under the new Scheme, from 6 April 2007, CIS vouchers no longer exist. Instead, SI2005/2045 reg 4(8), requires a contractor to give to certain subcontractors a statement showing the amounts paid and the deductions made from those payments. This payment and deduction statement (PDS) must be given to every subcontractor from whom a deduction has been made under the Scheme, regardless of whether the deduction was at the standard or higher rate. Contractors paying subcontractors, from whom deductions are not required to be made, do not have to give those subcontractors a payment and deduction statement, though they may if they so choose. Frequency of issue The PDS must be issued to the subcontractor within 14 days after the end of the tax month to which it relates. It may cover all payments made to the subcontractor, within the tax month, or it may be issued on a payment by payment basis - as long as a minimum of one payment statement is issued each tax month. Information on the statement Contractors may choose the style of the payment and deduction statement but it must include at least the following items of information:- Contractor’s name and employer’s tax reference The end date of the tax month in which the payment was made (for example, ‘Tax month ending 5 June 2007’) The following details about the subcontractor name UTR personal verification number (but only if the subcontractor could not be verified and a deduction at the higher rate has been applied) the gross amount of the payment made to the subcontractor the cost of any materials that has reduced the amount upon which the deduction has been applied the amount of the deduction. How do contractors give subcontractors a payment and deduction statement? The PDS must be issued to the subcontractor, in writing, including by fax. The contractor can also issue the subcontractor’s payment and deduction statement electronically, that is, by email, but only where the contractor and subcontractor agree to this method, and the statement is in a form that allows the subcontractor to save and print it. An example of how a PDS might look is shown at Appendix E of booklet CIS340 - ‘Construction Industry Scheme. Guide for contractors and subcontractors’. A pdf document of a PDS is also available from this manual at CISR96020 or from the GOV.UK website https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/construction-industry-scheme-forms-and-publications Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12170
CISR12170 - The Scheme: contractors: monthly returns Each month, contractors must send HMRC a complete return of all payments made in the preceding tax month to all subcontractors within the Scheme. All subcontractors must be included on the return regardless of whether they were paid gross* net of the standard deduction, or net of the higher deduction. *No entry needs to be made in the ‘materials’ box on the return Monthly returns must be submitted within 14 days of the end of the tax month to which they relate. Failure to meet the deadline for their submission incurs automatic penalties. The legislation, under which these were charged and for what period, is shown in the table below, with further links provided for detailed guidance about the penalties charged under each provision. From May 2016 the contractor CIS return must be submitted online. If a contractor has paid no subcontractors in the month, they must tell us or they will incur a penalty. If contractors do not expect to pay subcontractors for a number of months they can ask us to inhibit the issue of the monthly return for up to six months and a period of ‘Inactivity’ will be set on the CIS record. For more information on the monthly return, please see CISR60000 onwards. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12180
CISR12180 - The Scheme: contractors: paying over deductions SI2005/2045 reg 7, requires a contractor who is liable to make deductions under CIS to pay those deductions over to the relevant HMRC Accounts Office within 14 days of the end of the month, or 17 days of the end of the month, if paid electronically. However, where the total of deductions due in respect of the combined PAYE/ITSC obligations of a contractor will, on average, total less than £1,500 each month, SI2005/2045 reg 8 allows the contractor to pay over deductions within 14 days of the end of the tax quarter, or 17 days of the end of the tax quarter, if paid electronically. Regulation 9 directions Where a contractor fails to pay over deductions which are due, the contractor may maintain that there are mitigating factors and apply for a direction under SI2005/2045 reg 9 to be made. The procedures relating to Regulation 9(5) directions are described in detail in the section at CISR83000 . Regulation 9(5) replaces Regulations 10(3) and 10(4) of the old CIS Scheme. Interest on late payments SI2005/2045 reg 14, provides for interest to be charged at the same rate as for late payments of Income Tax where a contractor fails to pay over deductions and the failure continues beyond the end of the tax year. This applies whether or not the deductions have been included in a Regulation 13 determination (see CISR82000 ). Regulation 13 replaces Regulation 14 of the old Scheme. You should note that this interest is payable without deduction of Income Tax by the contractor does not qualify as a deduction in the computation of income, profits or losses for tax purposes is calculated and levied by the Debt Management (DM) section. Interest on overpayments SI2005/2045 reg 15 provides for overpayments to qualify for a repayment supplement. The same may apply where a Regulation 13 determination is reduced resulting in an overpayment. Top of page Company subcontractors - setting off the deductions SI2005/2045 reg 56 provides that subcontractors that are limited companies can set off deductions they bear on their receipts against the following sums payable to us. employers’ and employees’ National Insurance contributions (NICs) due Pay As You Earn (PAYE) tax due from the company’s employees Student Loan repayments due from the company’s employees any refunds due to HMRC in respect of various statutory schemes, for example, SSP and SMP sums deducted from subcontractors. The company will need to reduce the amount of PAYE, NICs, Student Loan repayments and any CIS deductions that the company pays by the amount of CIS deductions made from the company’s income. If, for any month or quarter, the company’s own CIS deductions are greater than the PAYE, NICs, Student Loan repayments and CIS liabilities payable, the company should set off the excess against future payments in the same tax year. For years up to 2012/13, at the end of the tax year, once we had received the company’s P35 annual return, any excess CIS deductions that cannot be set off could be refunded or set against Corporation Tax due. No repayments or set off against other liabilities can be made in-year. For years 2013/14 and later, the company will show the CIS deductions taken from their own income on a new monthly PAYE Return called an Employer Payment Summary (EPS). The sums shown on the EPS are offset against PAYE, NICs, Student Loan repayments and CIS liabilities payable each month. Some employers joined the Real Time information (RTI) pilot phase during the 2012/13 tax year and so these new procedures will apply to these employers for the 2012/13 tax year as well as for 2013/14 and later years. Any excess CIS deductions that cannot be set off against PAYE liabilities during the tax year may be refunded or set against Corporation Tax due once the final PAYE and CIS returns due for the tax year have been submitted. No repayments or set off against other liabilities can be made in-year unless the company has gone into administration. Companies must keep a record of the amount of CIS deductions set off so they can complete their employer returns correctly. Companies may keep their own records for this purpose or they may use form CIS132, ‘Record of amounts set-off’ that can be found on the GOV.UK website. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12190
CISR12190 - The Scheme: contractors: multiple sites / schemes Some contractors administer operations from several different bases. A single contractor scheme can be difficult for these contractors to operate. It can be difficult for the business’s head office to organise the verification process and monthly returns across the various bases. SI2005/2045 reg 3, allows a contractor to elect to operate separate contractor schemes for each distinct part of the business. The election must be made to HMRC in writing and must include confirmation of the first tax period for which the election is to have effect. the information necessary to identify each group of subcontractors the contractor wishes to deal with under a separate contractor scheme. For instance, the contractor might define such a group in terms of ‘All subcontractors paid by my Bristol regional office’ and likewise for each of the remaining units. a declaration that the contractor makes payments subject to CIS only to the subcontractor groups identified in the election. This is so that the groups specified cover the contractor’s whole subcontractor workforce and none are left out of account. Regulation 3 elections are dealt with by the centralised employers group (NICEO). Guidance about setting up an additional scheme is set out in CISR30000 onwards. Revoking Regulation 3 elections Once made, an election remains in force until the contractor revokes it. A revocation notice must be provided by the contractor before the beginning of the tax month for which the election is to be revoked. However, a revocation does not prevent the contractor from making a new election for that or a later tax month. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12200
CISR12200 - The Scheme: contractors: production of records SI2005/2045 reg 51, requires a contractor to produce certain records for inspection when called upon to do so by an authorised officer of the Board. The records involved include those relating to the following payments made to subcontractors (or their nominees) in those years or income tax periods the officer specifies the cost of materials included in the payments the associated CIS deductions where these were applicable. The officer may inspect these records or specify production of particular records. This provision allows compliance and investigating officers to examine a contractor’s records in the course of a review or an investigation. Keeping records From time to time HMRC officers will want to examine the records of contractors in the same way as examinations of employers’ PAYE records are carried out. Where these records are in paper form, they may be preserved by optical imaging systems, provided that what is retained is a complete and unaltered image of the underlying paper document. Records must be kept for at least three years after the end of the tax year to which they relate and be made available on request. Contractors must provide: viewing facilities full-scale copies of the records if required. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12210
CISR12210 - The Scheme: contractors: review of business accounts When you receive accounts or a return for a business that is not already treated as a contractor, you should examine the return or accounts to see whether the amount spent on construction operations is now enough for the business to be considered a deemed contractor (See CISR12050 ). This is in order to identify clear-cut cases. Time need not be spent on detailed examination of cases which are only likely to be near the £1 million average threshold. Businesses whose annual expenditure fluctuates marginally above and below the limit should not be required to operate CIS. If you conclude that a business should be classified as a deemed contractor as a result of this examination, you should consider the guidance at CISR12060 to establish when the business should be required to operate the Scheme. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12220
CISR12220 - The Scheme: contractors: death of a contractor If a contractor dies, the responsibility for the running of the Scheme falls to their personal representative(s). This includes paying over deductions, verifying subcontractors and making returns. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12230
CISR12230 - The Scheme: contractors: scheme representatives A contractor that is a company within a group may be authorised to appoint another of the companies within the same group to undertake its obligations under the Scheme. For example, a group of several companies required to operate the Scheme could choose a single company within the group to operate CIS on their behalf. The definition of group companies for the purposes of this and other aspects of the Scheme, is contained at CTA10/s152. Basically, two companies are deemed to be members of a group if one is at least a 75% subsidiary of the other, or both companies are at least 75% subsidiaries of a third company and so on. The Scheme representative must continue to make returns and payments to us under the name of the company or companies for which it is acting. Each company that has chosen to have its Scheme obligations handled by another company within its group will always remain liable for any obligations it has under the Scheme even though it has chosen another company to operate the Scheme on its behalf. To request authorisation in these circumstances, the company should contact the CIS Helpline on 0300 200 3210. The helpline will then contact the NICEO (using an E-form to the Work Area Mailbox (WAM)) for the company making the request. NICEO should then explain to the company that wishes to act as a ‘scheme representative’ for any companies within the same group, that they will be set up as a Scheme Specific Agent (See CISR19030 ). Each company included in this arrangement should then submit an authorisation signed by either the company secretary or a director appointing the ‘scheme representative’ as a Scheme Specific Agent, and this should be forwarded once received to the Central Agent Authorisation Team (CAAT), Benton Park View, Newcastle for noting. Once this has been done, contractor monthly returns will be submitted to the ‘scheme representative’ for each company within the group for whom an authorisation has been received. The ‘scheme representative’ will file the contractor monthly return and make any payments due under the respective references in respect of each company for whom they have been appointed, although ultimately the responsibility for doing this still rests with the individual company within the group. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr12240
CISR12240 - The Scheme: contractors: Guidance for contractors CIS340 CIS340 - ‘Construction Industry Scheme. Guide for contractors and subcontractors’. This replaced booklet IR14/15(CIS) that explained the previous CIS Scheme and is available on-line at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/construction-industry-scheme-cis-340 Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr13010
CISR13010 - The Scheme: subcontractors: introduction Businesses and other concerns in the construction industry are known as ‘contractors’ and ‘subcontractors’. They include companies, partnerships and self-employed individuals. Contractors pay subcontractors for construction operations. Subcontractors can also be contractors at the same time. The Construction Industry Scheme does not apply to construction operations carried on outside the United Kingdom. ‘United Kingdom’ means Great Britain and Northern Ireland; it does not include the Irish Republic, the Isle of Man or the Channel Islands. It does include the territorial waters of the United Kingdom which, for the purposes of the Scheme, should be regarded as extending only 12 miles from the high watermark. A subcontractor who meets certain qualifying conditions may be paid gross by the contractors for whom they work. Where the subcontractor does not meet those conditions they can only be paid after a deduction has been made from the payment. If the subcontractor has not registered with HMRC, then the deduction that a contractor has to make from payments to that subcontractor must be at a higher rate than the standard deduction rate. See CISR43000 onwards for the section detailing the procedure for examining applications for gross payment and the following sections for the conditions to be met in the approval process: Turnover Test (see CISR44000 onwards) Business Test (see CISR45000 onwards) Compliance Test (see CISR46000 onwards). Where the individual, partnership or company passes these tests, the contractor can pay them gross, that is, with no deductions taken from the payment. This also applies to bodies deemed ‘gross’ such as local authorities and other public bodies (see CISR13040 ). Where a subcontractor may only be paid under deduction, the contractor must make a deduction from the amount of the payment, less the direct cost of any materials (exclusive of VAT) made to that subcontractor. That deduction is made on account of the subcontractor’s tax and Class 4 NIC liabilities, if the subcontractor is an individual or, on account of liabilities as an employer or contractor, if a company. Status of subcontractors Once registered for CIS, for either gross or net payment, it does not mean that every contract undertaken by the subcontractor can be taken to be one of self-employment. In some cases the subcontractor’s status may be that of an employee. In those circumstances the employer should operate PAYE on any payments under that contract. If you receive enquiries about a subcontractor’s employment status you should consider issuing the following HMRC leaflets which can be found in SEES: ES/FS1 ‘Employed or self-employed for Tax and National Insurance contributions’ - this leaflet is aimed at workers. ES/FS2 ‘Are your workers employed or self-employed for Tax and National Insurance contributions’ - this leaflet is aimed at employers / contractors. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr13020
CISR13020 - The Scheme: subcontractors: definition of subcontractor A subcontractor is any business which has agreed to carry out construction operations for another business or body which is a contractor or deemed contractor - whether by doing the operations itself, or by having them done by its own subcontractors or employees, or in any other way. Subcontractors include concerns normally known as main contractors, where they are engaged by a client who is a contractor; for example, a local authority. The term ‘subcontractor’ includes: a company, including any corporate body or public body, as well as any individual self-employed person(s) running a business or partnership a labour agency or staff bureau which contracts either to get work done with its own workforce, or to supply workers to a contractor a foreign business if the construction operations for which it is being paid take place in the United Kingdom or within United Kingdom territorial waters (up to the 12 mile limit) a local authority (and its Direct Service or Labour Organisation) or public body (or its subsidiaries) if they are engaged on construction operations for someone else (see CISR13040 for the list of Public Bodies affected) a gang-leader who agrees with a contractor on the work to be done, and in turn receives payment for the work of the gang. Businesses acting as both subcontractor and contractor Some businesses may act solely as contractors or as subcontractors but many act as both. This means that they both pay businesses below them and are paid by businesses above them in a chain. So for some of their transactions they will have to follow the rules for contractors and for others the rules for subcontractors. These businesses will be contractors under FA04/s57(2)(b)(i). Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr13030
CISR13030 - The Scheme: subcontractors: definition of 'labour- only' subcontractor The term ‘labour-only subcontractor’ includes arrangements where the subcontractor maybe required to supply their own tools. A subcontractor may also be required to supply materials connected with the contract, the cost of which will be deducted prior to the calculation of the deduction made from payments to those subcontractor without gross payment status. You should refer to the section dealing with ‘Payments’ at CISR15000 onwards for more details on this area. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr13040
CISR13040 - The Scheme: subcontractors: local authorities and other public bodies as subcontractors Local Authorities and many public bodies are deemed to be contractors where they spend over a certain amount on construction operations (See CISR12050 for more about ‘deemed contractors’). Local Authorities and the following public bodies are also subcontractors when carrying out construction operations. Although they will not be formally registered on CIS, they are to be regarded as holding gross payment status. The deduction scheme should not be applied, and no deductions should be made from payments to them. Port of London Authority Port of Tyne Authority Commission for the New Towns UK Atomic Energy Authority Welsh Development Agency Scottish Enterprise/Highlands and Islands Enterprise Registered Housing Associations and Societies British Broadcasting Corporation Government Departments and Executive Agencies Environment Agency British Waterways Board (up to 2 July 2012) Scottish Canals Transport for London Health Service bodies and NHS Trusts Olympic Development Authority (ODA) London Legacy Development Corporation (LLDC) Where a local authority sets up a Direct Labour Organisation (DLO) or Direct Service Organisation (DSO) to carry out construction operations, and the organisation remains part of the local authority, it is covered by the exemption described above which applies to local authorities. It may be treated as holding gross payment status. Where, however, a DLO or DSO incorporates it becomes a separate company liable to Corporation Tax even if wholly controlled by the local authority. Such a company must apply for registration to be paid gross or net to receive payments falling within the scope of the Scheme. If a public body or utility is privatised, it is then just like any other private business and must be registered on CIS to enable it to receive payments under the Scheme. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr13050
CISR13050 - The Scheme: subcontractors: labour agencies A labour agency supplying workers to a contractor is obliged to operate PAYE even though the contract between the agency and the worker is a contract for services (ITEAPA03/s44). This means that circumstances in which an agency has to operate the Construction Industry Scheme in the role of contractor are likely to be rare. The most common circumstance is where the agency engages personal service companies to supply the workers. Where a worker is supplied to a contractor by or through an agency and the worker carries out construction operations under the terms of a contract they have with the agency, the agency supplying the worker will be a subcontractor as far as the contractor is concerned. In all cases the contractor should apply the Scheme when making payment to the agency. The agency is just like any other private business and should register as a subcontractor to enable it to receive payments under the Scheme either gross or after the standard rate of deduction has been applied. However where a worker is merely introduced to the contractor by an agency and carries out construction operations under the terms of a contract they have with the contractor, the Scheme does not apply to the agency. See also CISR14070 where a UK concern is providing labour for an overseas project. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr13060
CISR13060 - The Scheme: subcontractors: gangs The contractor, having applied the Scheme to payments made to the gang-leader (or gangmaster), need not be concerned with the transactions between the gang-leader and the other members of the gang. Any deductions from payments to the members of the gang become the responsibility of the gang-leader. If the contractor makes a separate agreement with any other member of the gang, then that member will be a subcontractor or employee of the contractor. A contractor who pays each member of the gang separately must treat each as a separate subcontractor, or employee, and apply the deduction scheme or PAYE as appropriate in each case. Where there is any doubt as to the correct treatment, the contractor should be advised to consult the CIS Helpline for advice. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr13070
CISR13070 - The Scheme: subcontractors: deductions from payments Deductions from payments: Meaning of ‘deduction’ The term ‘deduction’ refers to the amount that a contractor has to withhold from a payment (exclusive of VAT) for labour made to a subcontractor. Deductions from payments: Materials Where the subcontractor is required to supply their own materials, the deduction does not apply to that part of the payment which the payer is satisfied relates to the cost of the materials (exclusive of VAT) to the subcontractor. For more details refer to CISR15000 onwards which deals specifically with ‘payments’ falling within the scope of the Scheme. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr13080
CISR13080 - The Scheme: subcontractors: standard rate of deduction The standard rate of deduction is 20%. This rate was fixed by Statutory Instrument SI2007/46. Contractors may only apply the standard rate of deduction to those subcontractors that they have verified with HMRC or, where verification was not necessary (see CISR12150 ), to those subcontractors who only held a valid permanent or temporary registration card as at 5 April 2007. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr13090
CISR13090 - The Scheme: subcontractors: higher rate of deduction for un-matched subcontractors The higher rate of deduction is 30%. This rate was fixed by Statutory Instrument SI2007/46. Contractors must apply the higher rate of deduction to those subcontractors that they have been unable to verify with HMRC. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr13100
CISR13100 - The Scheme: subcontractors: business taken over by another subcontractor Where there is a change in the type of concern, for example, where a business previously run by an individual is taken over by a partnership or company, the existing CIS registration cannot be used for the new business. For example, where a sole trader or partnership becomes a company or a partnership becomes a sole trader, a new business is created which will need a CIS registration. Use the links below to view the specific details for cases involving changes in the type of concern and applications for gross payment: In all such cases, the subcontractor will have to register the new businesses and make a fresh application for gross payment status if that was the status previously held. (For details of how to apply the turnover test, see CISR44000 ). To receive payments under the Scheme without having deductions made at the higher rate, the new business must register for CIS and apply either for gross payment or payment under deduction at the standard rate. Similarly, if an individual takes over as sole proprietor of a business having previously been a partner or director, they must register again for CIS as any previous registration by a partner or director of the old business will no longer be valid. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr13110
CISR13110 - The Scheme: subcontractors: verifying subcontractors When a subcontractor begins work for a new contractor, the contractor must be satisfied that the contract between them is one of self-employment. The contractor will usually then have to contact HMRC to ‘verify’ the subcontractor. Verification enables the contractor to check that the subcontractor is registered for CIS, and find out whether they must pay the subcontractor gross or under deduction. There are times when the contractor does not need to verify a subcontractor, such as where they have already worked for that contractor in the current or previous two tax years, or where they have already been verified by another company within the contractor’s group. On contacting HMRC, where a subcontractor needs to be verified, the contractor will be told to pay the subcontractor gross, if HMRC has previously accepted the subcontractor’s application for gross payment. Alternatively, the contractor will be told to make a deduction from the subcontractor’s payment at the standard rate, after allowing for the cost of any materials incurred by the subcontractor. Where HMRC cannot trace the subcontractor’s record, perhaps because they have not registered for CIS or have given the wrong details to the contractor, the contractor will be told to make a deduction at the higher rate from the subcontractor’s payments. Further information on the verification process is contained at CISR50000 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr13120
CISR13120 - The Scheme: subcontractors: HM Revenue & Customs booklet for subcontractors (CIS340) CIS340 - ‘Construction Industry Scheme. Guide for contractors and subcontractors’. This replaced booklet IR14/15(CIS) that explained the previous Scheme. The booklet is available on-line at CIS340 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14600
CISR14600 - The Scheme: construction operations: contents CISR14610 Dealing with 'Scope' enquiries CISR14620 Disputes about 'Scope' - Contractor / HMRC disputes Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14010
CISR14010 - The Scheme: construction operations: introduction | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The range of operations carried out in the construction industry has always been diverse and this aspect has become more marked as electronic technologies have come to form part of civil engineering structures, buildings and their services. This section cannot list every kind of activity that should be considered a construction operation. When you encounter an unfamiliar operation, bear in mind the following pointers: Ask the enquirer for a description of: the operation (if they use technical terms you do not understand ask them to explain the operation in layman’s language) the circumstances in which it is being done (for instance, is it being carried out overseas, or is it the supply of materials or equipment rather than installation?). Identify the key word, or words, describing the operation. Using the Intranet search facility narrow the search to include only the CIS Guidance enter the keyword (or keywords) alternatively look at the ‘Scope’ index at CISR14330 to see if the keyword appears there consult any information panel identified in the search. If the keyword search does not reveal useful information, consider whether you can reach a conclusion by reference to the class of operation. For instance, the enquirer may be asking about a specialised kind of production machinery installed in a factory. In that case you could refer to CISR14190 dealing with ‘industrial plant’ for general guidelines. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14020
CISR14020 - The Scheme: construction operations: scope of CIS | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The Construction Industry Scheme does not apply to all contracts involving construction operations. For CIS to apply, certain factors must be present in the situation. There must be a ‘contract relating to construction operations’ under which one party is a ‘subcontractor’ (as defined in FA04/S58) and another party is a ‘contractor’ because they are defined as such in FA04/S59 or because they are also a subcontractor under a contract relating to construction operations. Contract The expression ‘relating to construction operations’ is quite broad. Any contract awarded by a contractor that lays a duty on another party to execute, or arrange for the execution of construction operations, or supply labour for such operations, represents a contract relating to construction operations. This applies even if the construction element only forms part of the overall contract. Thus a contract to supply and install fixed furniture such as a fitted kitchen, for instance, would be regarded as a contract relating to construction operations by virtue of the installation element. A contract means any legally binding agreement or arrangement under which one person does work or provides services for another person. A contract includes an arrangement made by word of mouth as well as a written document. There are standard forms of contract drawn up by the Joint Contracts Tribunal (JCT) for the construction industry. See CISR14030 for more details of the differing types of contract you may encounter. Subcontractor Under FA04/S58 a subcontractor, under a contract relating to construction operations (not being a contract of employment), is someone who is either under a duty to the contractor to: carry out construction operations, or to supply their own labour for such operations (for a company this means supplying the labour of its officers or employees), or to supply the labour of others for such operations, or to arrange for the labour of others to be supplied for carrying out the operations, or is answerable to the contractor for the carrying out of the operations by others. This provision is framed to catch any person executing or contributing to the execution of construction operations on subcontract terms. It covers not only substantial building businesses but also individual subcontractors who supply only their own labour, labour agencies that supply construction workers and developers who arrange for construction work to be carried out by others. For more detailed information about subcontractors, see CISR13000 onwards. Contractors What constitutes a contractor is fully described at CISR12000 onwards. Construction Operations The expression ‘construction operations’ covers almost anything that is done in the United Kingdom and its territorial waters to a building, structure, civil engineering work or installation, whether of a permanent or temporary nature. This includes: construction alteration repair extension demolition dismantling. Anything done on a construction site in connection with construction work is therefore likely to be a construction operation unless it falls in one of the following classes: It is clearly not, by its nature, a construction operation. This applies to activities such as the running of canteen, hostel, medical, safety, security or temporary office facilities. It is specifically excluded from the Scheme by FA04/S74 (3) (the excluded operations are dealt with in detail later in this section). Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14030
CISR14030 - The Scheme: construction operations: unusual contracts | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| There are some unusual contracts that can include, or fall to be treated as, construction operations and are therefore caught by the Scheme. Some types of unusual contracts are dealt with below. Call off contracts Put simply, this represents a firm commitment by a contractor to purchase goods or services from a subcontractor over a period of time. A ‘Call’ or an ‘Order’ off this type of contract will not be a contract in its own right. Before you can decide whether a payment is caught by the Scheme you will need to know what specific operations can be contracted for in the ‘Call Off’ contract. ‘Call Off’ contracts are sometimes confused with framework or enabling agreements. In a framework agreement, a rate for services might be agreed, but there is no firm contract until a purchase order is placed. Such orders are generally called ‘Spot’ contracts. A framework agreement will have no contractual commitment to purchase goods or services and it is that which sets it apart from a ‘Call Off’ contract. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Mixed contracts There are other types of contracts that are mixed. They include items that are caught by the Scheme and others that are not. If any part of a mixed contract includes construction operations, or more strictly ‘relates to’ construction operations, then all payments under that contract are caught by the Scheme, even those payments that are wholly for non-construction work at the point that they are made. Top of page Invoice splitting Some subcontractors may try to circumvent the Scheme by splitting the invoices between the construction and the non-construction element. For example, an electrical subcontractor might have a contract for rewiring and the installation of a burglar alarm system. The former operation is caught by the Scheme and the latter is not. If both operations are part of the same contract all of the payment will be caught by the Scheme, even where the subcontractor issues separate invoices for the work carried out. In deciding whether a payment is caught by the Scheme it is important to look to the contract and not the payment in the first instance. Payments that are not for construction operations will still fall within the Scheme if construction operations form part of the overall contract. It is important therefore to determine also whether the payment stands alone or is merely one in series of instalments or other payment arrangements for a larger contract. Top of page Excluded payments Payments for the works listed as excluded in this chapter are only outside the Scheme if contracted for in isolation. The list of works treated as construction operations in this chapter is intended to help you to identify contracts that ‘relate to’ construction operations and not to provide a definitive answer as to whether a payment for that work falls within the scheme. You will need to look at the contract as a whole to make that decision. Top of page (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14040
CISR14040 - The Scheme: construction operations: reverse premiums | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Landlords or Developers sometimes offer inducements to prospective tenants to take up an interest in land. It might take the form of a rent-free period, a sum payable on occupation or a contribution to, or payment for, the costs of fitting out the property. These inducements are commonly called ‘reverse premiums’. See BIM41050 onwards for more on the background and treatment of ‘reverse premiums’. Further information can be found at CISR14045. Prior to 6 April 2007, Reverse Premiums came within the Scheme. However, from 6 April 2007, Reverse Premiums are specifically excluded from the Scheme by SI2005/2045 reg 20. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14045
CISR14045 - The Scheme: construction operations: reverse premiums – examples of what does and does not constitute a reverse premium for CIS purposes. A payment for construction work which constitutes a reverse premium for CIS purposes, does not fall within the provisions of CIS, so the payment does not need to be subject to any CIS deduction or reported to HMRC via the CIS reporting provisions when made. CISR14040 explains what does/does not constitute a reverse premium for CIS purposes. CISR14045explains which payments are excluded from being reverse premiums for corporation tax and income tax purposes, but not for CIS purposes. Contained below are some examples to explain what HMRC does and does not consider to be a reverse premium for CIS purposes. See also BIM41085. Examples:- 1. A property developer is constructing a new shopping mall which they will let out to various retailers once the construction build is complete. A potential tenant approaches the property developer (landlord) enquiring about letting out one of the retail outlets as a hairdressing salon. The Landlord offers to contribute towards the fitting out of the outlet with kitchen & washroom facilities, reception seating area, shop counter, hot water supply & plumbing to five wash basins and hairdressing chairs on the condition that tenant will take out a 5 year lease on the shop. This inducement payment will qualify as a reverse premium for CIS purposes as it solely constitutes a payment to the tenant to fund tenant works. 2. A property owner (landlord) is building a number of adjoining properties which they will let to tenants to use for retail and leisure purposes. One potential tenant, a restauranteur, approaches the landlord about renting one of the buildings to use as a Cantonese restaurant. In completing the build, the landlord agrees to pay that potential tenant towards the cost of placing a curved pagoda style roof on the building, provided they take out a 2 year lease on the property. That inducement payment will not constitute a reverse premium because the roof forms part of the cost incurred in producing a finished building, regardless of the style of roof fitted. 3. A property developer is renovating a multi-story building into office space which they will then let to multiple tenants. The refurbishment includes installing a new heating and air conditioning system, water supply, new sanitation and kitchen facilities, electrical floor boxes, suspended ceiling with overhead lighting and new carpeting on each floor. One potential tenant wishes to occupy a floor to use as a call centre but tells the landlord that to meet their specific business need, they would require multiple electrical floor boxes to be installed in specific areas on the floorplate to accommodate their telephony systems. To secure the lease, the landlord makes an inducement payment to the tenant towards them paying an electrician to install those floor boxes per the tenant’s requirements. As these additional floor boxes are specific to that particular tenant, the payment would constitute a reverse premium for CIS purposes as it is being used by the tenant to install specialist facilities solely required by them (tenant works). In this example, any carpeting must be laid after the floor boxes are installed. As part of that inducement to take the lease, the landlord also agrees with the tenant that they will make a contribution towards the cost of the tenant buying and installing a carpet of their choosing. This inducement payment from the landlord to the tenant, used for the installation of the tenant’s own carpet, will also fall to be a reverse premium for CIS purposes, as it also constitutes tenant works. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14047
CISR14047 - The Scheme: construction operations: Payments made by landlord to tenant payments – Overview Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14048
CISR14048 - The Scheme: construction operations: Payments made by landlord to tenant – Regulation 20A Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14049
CISR14049 - The Scheme: appendix to Regulation 20A Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14050
CISR14050 - The Scheme: construction operations: dealing with 'scope' enquiries | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| While most of the operations carried out within the construction industry are traditional building activities that are undoubtedly caught by the Construction Industry Scheme, doubts can arise where the operation under consideration: is on the margins of the industry, for instance, the installation of manufacturing machinery in buildings involves new building techniques and equipment is only caught by the Scheme in certain circumstances, for instance, landscaping. When dealing with enquiries from subcontractors or contractors about whether a particular operation is caught you should be careful to express your conclusion in terms of the question put to you. Thus, if a subcontractor asks: ‘Is the installation of widgets in buildings subject to the Construction Industry Scheme?’ your reply should say that ‘The installation of widgets in buildings is/is not subject to the Construction Industry Scheme’. Above all, you should not say something like ‘The work your business does is outside the scope of the Scheme’. This is because a small change in the type of work done or the contractual arrangements may later bring it within the scope of the Scheme. When approached for advice on the scope of the Scheme, follow the action guide at CISR14610 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14060
CISR14060 - The Scheme: construction operations: disputes about 'scope' | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Under the Construction Industry Scheme these disputes generally take two forms the subcontractor objects to registering under the Scheme or to a deduction made by a contractor from a payment because they consider that the work done is outside the scope of CIS a contractor from whom deductions in respect of payments made are being sought by HMRC maintains that the work done was outside the scope of CIS These situations are considered in the following paragraphs. Subcontractor/Contractor dispute Remember that the contractor is potentially liable to a penalty if they fail to verify and make a deduction in respect of a payment for construction work that is caught by the Scheme. For this reason the contractor should initially contact CT CIS Centre for the final decision on any dispute. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Settling disputes - written confirmation In the majority of cases, the question of whether or not a particular operation falls within or outside the Scheme will be relatively straightforward. In all cases you will need to obtain precise details of the work to be carried out. This is essential in the event that you are asked to confirm your decision in writing to either, or both, parties to the contract. When doing so you should always avoid generalisation and ‘To whom it may concern’ type letters and only refer to specific operations carried out by the subcontractor. That said, disputes may still arise where a subcontractor acknowledges that some work they do is within the scope of the Scheme but claims that a particular contract is outside its scope when payment is made. If such a dispute is referred to you, you should consult the information panel at CISR14050 and follow the action guide at CISR14610 . Contractor/HMRC dispute Where a contractor is disputing their liability to account for a deduction which it is believed should have been made from subcontract payments, the contractor may contend that there was no such liability because the work involved is not a construction operation. There is no procedure for laying a dispute between HMRC and the contractor about the scope of the Scheme directly before the Tribunal. Where such a dispute arises you should first try to reach a settlement by agreement. If the contractor continues to deny liability, you should then raise a Regulation 13 determination covering the disputed deduction (for guidance about Regulation 13 determinations, see CISR82000 onwards). The issue of the determination gives the contractor the opportunity to appeal and allows the matter in dispute to either go for an Internal Review, or for a hearing before the Tribunal. In these circumstances, follow the action guide at CISR14620 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14070
CISR14070 - The Scheme: construction operations: territorial limits | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| FA04/S74 defines work that is subject to the Construction Industry Scheme in terms of both its type and the location at which it is carried out. The Construction Industry Scheme does not apply to construction operations carried on outside the United Kingdom (FA04/S74 (1)(b)). ‘United Kingdom’ means Great Britain and Northern Ireland and includes the territorial waters of the United Kingdom which, for the purposes of the Scheme, should be regarded as extending only 12 nautical miles from the high watermark. It does not include the Irish Republic, the Isle of Man or the Channel Islands. Note that where construction operations are carried out partly within UK territorial waters and partly outside under a single contract, all payments made under that contract are considered to be subject to the Scheme. This is relevant, for instance, where a pipeline is constructed from an offshore rig outside territorial waters to a UK onshore terminal. It follows that where a UK-based construction concern secures a contract to carry out an overseas project, it should not operate CIS for subcontractors engaged to carry out the work whether recruited in the UK or elsewhere. Overseas projects If the UK concern is providing labour for an overseas project rather than carrying out work specified in physical terms, the concern may be acting as a labour agency subject to ITEAPA03/s44. In that case the concern may be liable to operate PAYE for workers sent overseas (See CISR13050 for more details on labour agencies). On the other hand, an overseas concern that secures a contract to carry out construction work in the United Kingdom for a contractor is subject to CIS as a subcontractor. The overseas concern is also liable to operate CIS as a contractor in their own right if they engage subcontractors for parts of the work (see CISR72650 ). Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14080
CISR14080 - The Scheme: construction operations: artistic works | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| FA04/S74 (3)(f) excludes from the Construction Industry Scheme ‘the making, installation and repair of artistic works, being sculptures, murals and other works that are wholly artistic in nature’. It is important to note that for the exclusion to apply the works must be wholly artistic. This means that if works fulfil a normal functional purpose associated with a building they are not excluded. For example, wrought iron gates installed in a building entrance are highly decorative examples of what is basically a common building feature. The fact that their design embodies an artistic element does not make them wholly artistic works. You should consider whether the ‘works’ are integral to the building or structure and fulfil a particular function. A mosaic wall or floor in a swimming pool or a shower, for example, may be artistic but in addition have both a structural and a protective purpose. This may be considered analogous to building a bathroom wall and covering it with ceramic tiles. Therefore, the purpose of the mosaic wall/floor in these circumstances would not be considered ‘wholly’ artistic. Another approach, in deciding whether works are wholly artistic, is to consider whether the art work itself can be removed relatively easily and without any damage to the building or structure. If it can, it is likely to be wholly artistic, for example, removing a painting from a wall or lifting a freestanding sculpture. If the act of removing the item necessitates construction operations to be carried out, then it is likely that its purpose was not wholly artistic. For example. chiselling up a mosaic floor will require another replacement floor covering. Again, in these circumstances the item could not be considered to be wholly artistic. Within CIS The exclusion does not apply to stained glass windows ornamental gates, balustrades decorative tiling. decorative paintwork, for example gold leaf work/painting on a banister, dado rails, skirting boards, ceiling rose/cornices, architraves ornamental fountains that may require the following; foundation work, installation of a water supply source and associated pipe-work, installation of electrical power source for water pumps and/or lighting. Top of page Excluded from CIS The following are excluded from CIS sculptures murals other works serving a wholly artistic purpose. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14090
CISR14090 - The Scheme: construction operations: building service systems | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| FA04/S74 (2)(c) states that the following operations are within the scope of the Construction Industry Scheme ‘installation in any building or structure of systems of heating, lighting, air-conditioning, ventilation, power supply, drainage, sanitation, water supply or fire protection’ This provision is straightforward but you should note the following points only ‘systems’ of a type listed in the subsection above are included. Note that it does not include other systems that may be found in a building or structure such as, public address, security, IT and so on it only applies to installation of these systems, not their repair or maintenance. Neither does it apply to their alteration or extension(s). replacement of a system, for example, complete electrical rewiring, amounts to installation installation of such systems in locations other than a building or structure is normally caught by the other provisions of FA04/S74 (2). For example, external illumination of a building often involves running power-lines to lights located at some distance from the walls. Power-lines are ‘works forming part of the land (FA04/S74 (2)(b)). The following paragraphs set out some general considerations and deal with special cases. ‘Systems’ generally This provision refers only to the installation in a building or structure of the following service systems. Heating Including central heating systems, hot air convection systems, and storage heating systems. Lighting Including electrical lighting systems that provide illumination to the interior of a building or structure but does not include street lighting. Air-conditioning Normally these are systems that use refrigerant, compressors and fans to cool the internal temperature of buildings and structures. Ventilation Normally these are systems that allow clean/fresh air to flow in a building/structure, or the removal of stale air, dust or fumes, and can also used to tackle condensation or humidity. Power supply Systems that supply power such as gas, for example, mains gas supply or liquefied gas, or Electricity for example, electrical wiring/cabling in building/structure. Drainage Any system that takes waste water away from a building, for example guttering, down pipes, waste pipes, over-flows and external drainage, up to the point that they join the main sewer system. Sanitation Toilets, urinals, hospital sluices and associated pipe-work. Water Supply Can include water mains pipe-work to property, stopcock, water meters, hot and cold water pipe-work to taps, baths, showers, water tanks and so on, when carried out as part of the installation of the water supply system. Although repairs to building service systems are not in isolation caught by the Scheme, if the contract to repair includes any making good to the building or structure, then the Scheme will apply to any payment under that contract. Top of page Repair of systems The legislation regarding building service systems only refers to their installation. Therefore, repairs to any of these systems are outside the scope of CIS. Soldering a leaking pipe or patching a leaking boiler, replacing a defective tap, rewiring a single defective circuit, replacing a burned-out ventilation fan motor, replacing a broken wash basin, fixing a leaking radiator or replacing standard radiator valves with thermostatic valves, are all plainly repairs to a part of the overall building system. Even where the repaired/replaced item may represent a significant component part of the overall system, such as a central heating boiler, its replacement does not constitute ‘the installation of a system of heating’ and therefore will not fall within CIS. Repairs/replacements to building service systems will be caught, if they are carried out as part of a mixed contract of works, for example, a payment under a single contract to repair both a broken gutter (normally excluded) and replace broken roof tiles will all be caught under the scheme. Top of page Extending Existing Systems As mentioned above only the installation of building systems is within CIS. As with repairs, extensions to systems will similarly be excluded, this could be for example, the addition of an extra radiator to a central heating system, or the wiring of additional electrical plug sockets. Where a building has been extended by the addition of further floors above or rooms to the side, the extension work will be a construction operation caught by the scheme under FA04/S74 (2)(a). Any system extensions carried out as part of the same contract to extend a building or structure will also be caught as part of a mixed contract. Top of page Fire protection systems See the information panel at CISR14160 . Top of page Air-conditioning systems Complete installation is within the Scheme. Replacement of parts is outside the Scheme. Top of page Solar Panels The installation of solar panels to provide electricity will be a construction operation within CIS, except where the contract is directly with a private householder. Top of page Water-related systems Installation of water meters, water softeners and other water treatment systems is within the scope of CIS. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14100
CISR14100 - The Scheme: construction operations: buildings and structures Section 74(2)(a) Finance Act 2004 states that construction, alteration, repair, extension, demolition or dismantling of buildings or structures (whether permanant or not) including offshore installations are within the scope of the Construction Industry Scheme (CIS). This provision includes conservatories, green houses and garden sheds if based on a foundation. Prefabricated structures FA04/S74 (2)(a) also covers substantial prefabricated structures such as oil rigs and modular elements of oil rigs that are constructed onshore but later towed to their final location at sea. However, the manufacture of building components and their delivery are not construction operations (FA04/S74(3)(c)). Modern methods of construction (MMC) can include prefabricated components constructed off-site (for example, in a factory), which may be delivered and assembled on site by the same manufacturing company. Examples of these components include, but are not limited to: Doors Stairs/staircase Window walls Wall panels Floor panels Pre-cast concrete foundation walls and slabs Modular wiring: wiring looms (e.g. pre-assembled cabling systems) Timber frames Precast panels Precast foundations Bathrooms (including enclosing/supporting structure) Kitchen (including enclosing/supporting atructure) Room sized components Whether prefabricated building components are considered construction operations within scope of the CIS, under FA04/S57(2) , is dependent on the service being provided and the type of contract which has been agreed. If the construction activities fall under a ‘mixed contract’ (see CISR14030 ), where any part of the contract includes or relates to construction operations, then all payments are within the scope of the CIS. For contracts that fall within the scope of CIS and where payment is to be made to a net paid subcontractor, deductions made under the scheme should only be applied to that part of the payment not representing the direct cost of materials to the subcontractor (FA04/S61 (1)) (see CISR15060 ). Where modules are built in a factory and purchased as a complete unit, the materials cost would be the total cost of purchase of the completed module not including installation costs. However, where components are not purchased as a unit and they are assembled during the construction operation, the labour costs to assemble the components should not be included in the material costs. Example 1 When a company has a contract to supply, deliver and install a prefabricated component on-site, it is considered as a ‘mixed contract’ and therefore CIS is applicable. For example, a timber frame structure for a residential home is built off-site in a factory and the modules are delivered and installed by the same company, this means CIS will apply to the entire contract and is a ‘mixed contract’. Example 2 A company only has a contract to supply and deliver several floor panels and the roof structure to a construction site for commercial purposes, installation is not included in the contract. As the company's obligations under the construction contract will be fulfilled following the delivery of the prefabricated components, they are outside the scope of CIS as the contract does not include installation of the modules. If the contract included installation of the units, then that would bring them under a ‘mixed contract’ and CIS would apply. Example 3 There are several entities within the same corporate group. A third-party enters into a contract with Company A to build and supply modules and a separate contract with Company B to install the module. Company A will be outside the scope of CIS as there is no installation element within the contract. Company B’s contract will be within the scope of CIS as they are installing the modules. However, if there is a single contract with the third party and Company B to supply, deliver, and install the modules, this contract will be in scope of CIS. It is the installation element of the contract that brings it within the scope of CIS. The intra-group supply of the modules from Company A to Company B, provided the contract does not include installation, would be outside the scope of CIS. Example 4 A property developer contracts with Company A for the supply and delivery of prefabricated “room sized” components. Installation is carried out by a third party, but under the terms of the contract Company A is required to test/inspect the components following installation. The supply and delivery of the components by Company A and the subsequent testing and inspection are outside the scope of CIS. However, should Company A be required to modify the components once installed this new work would fall within the scope of CIS and the property developer would need to consider the application of the mixed contract rules. Shipbuilding Although ships are undoubtedly ‘structures’ they are not structures to which CIS applies. This is because they are vehicles, not civil engineering constructions or static industrial installations. Therefore any operation carried out on a ship including the maintenance, re-fitting or painting / re-painting of a ship will be outside the scope of CIS. Temporary structures Although section 74(2)(a) indicates that it applies to temporary buildings and structures, in practice, certain temporary structures are considered to be outside its scope as long as they are only in place for a limited time. These include: exhibition stands film and TV sets theatre sets marquees portable offices (the exclusion does not extend to their use on construction sites - see ‘site facilities’ below) It is unlikely that exhibition stands and marquees will remain in place for long. Similarly, film, TV and theatre sets are commonly dismantled quite soon after their construction. If the structure in question will not remain in place for more than two months you may accept that its erection is outside the scope of CIS. Site facilities Note that the exclusion of temporary structures does not apply to the erection of site huts, portable offices and similar facilities on building sites. Where these are constructed on building sites, they are considered to be integral to the main construction operations and therefore are in scope of CIS. Site hoardings These are also treated as integral to the main operations and are therefore within the scope of the Scheme. Lifts Lifts are an integral part of the building in which they are installed. Whether installed in new buildings or older buildings being adapted to accommodate them their installation represents a construction operation. This applies also to similar machinery installed in buildings and other locations such as: chair lifts installed in domestic or commercial premises (see below) escalators travelators (moving walkways) baggage-handling equipment (baggage carousels and conveyors) window cleaning hoists Note, however, that the maintenance and repair of this kind of machinery is outside the scope of the scheme. Chair lifts and stair lifts Chair lifts are different from stair lifts. A chair lift will normally rise vertically through a building in order to move the passenger from one level or floor to another. The nature of the plant and equipment involved in a chair lift requires it to be integrally fixed to the fabric of the building, and its installation will be a construction operation to the building or structure. FA04/S74 (2)(a) refers. Stair lifts utilise the existing stairwell of a building by running a purpose made rail along the profile of the staircase. The rail is simply bolted to the wall and a chair moves along the rail powered by an electric motor connected to a nearby power supply. As the installation of a stair lift can be installed and removed without any significant alteration or repair to the building, the installation and/or repair of stair lifts in isolation will be outside the scope of CIS. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14110
CISR14110 - The Scheme: construction operations: cleaning | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| FA04/S74 (2)(d) states that the following operation is within the scope of the Construction Industry Scheme ‘internal cleaning of buildings and structures, so far as carried out in the course of their construction, alteration, repair, extension or restoration’. This provision is straightforward but you should note the following points it only applies to cleaning undertaken in the course of, or on completion of construction work it does not apply to the external cleaning of buildings and structures it does not apply to routine cleaning undertaken on existing commercial or industrial premises not undergoing construction work Some special cases are considered in the following paragraphs. Cleaning prior to handover After construction, commercial or domestic buildings commonly remain in the hands of the developer until sold. Following the above principles, cleaning carried out for the contractor/developer during construction is subject to CIS, so is the cleaning operation carried out when construction is completed. However, subsequent cleaning done after completion and while the building remains in the hands of the contractor/developer is outside the scope of the Scheme. Top of page External cleaning As an isolated operation, the external cleaning, jet cleaning, sand blasting and chemical cleaning of the masonry or brickwork or glazing of buildings and structures is not caught by CIS. Where, however, the contract also requires the subcontractor to make good any deterioration of the brickwork, stonework or glazing revealed by the cleaning, this represents a repair of the building. In this case the contract is mixed in character and because one of its requirements (‘repair’) is within the scope of CIS, the whole contract is caught. External cleaning carried out on building sites, for example, road cleaning on housing estates undergoing construction, is not caught by CIS. This should not be confused with site clearance which is a more substantial operation and is subject to CIS. Top of page Show houses After construction, houses commonly remain in the hands of the developer until sold. Following the above principles, cleaning carried out for the contractor/developer during construction is subject to CIS, so is the cleaning operation carried out when construction is completed. However, cleaning done after completion and while the building remains in the hands of the contractor/ developer is outside the scope of the Scheme. Top of page Within CIS internal cleaning of buildings and structures in the course of, or on completion of their construction Top of page Excluded from CIS external cleaning of buildings and structures routine cleaning of commercial and industrial premises routine clearance of gutters and sewage pipes. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14120
CISR14120 - The Scheme: construction operations: commissioning | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| ‘Commissioning’ is an expression that can cover activities ranging from merely inspecting an installation to a much broader commitment involving inspecting the installation, adjusting operational settings and, most critically, making good physical deficiencies discovered. It follows that ‘Commissioning’ can, in some circumstances, be caught by the Scheme. However, where the work comprises no more than inspecting the installation, perhaps manually adjusting controls to ensure optimum operation of the equipment and then making a report to the client/contractor, the work is not regarded as being within the Scheme. In this case the work is treated as being more in the nature of a ‘survey’ and therefore subject to the exclusion in FA04/S74 (3)(e) relating to the ‘professional work of …consultants in building, engineering …’. Of course, if the work also includes a duty to make good physical deficiencies in the installation then it is treated as ‘rendering complete’ the earlier work and is within the scope of CIS (FA04/S74 (2)(f)). It follows that where the installation of a system is treated as falling outside the Scheme, the activity of commissioning must also be excluded. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14130
CISR14130 - The Scheme: construction operations: computer and telephone networks | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The installation of computer networks or telephone networks in buildings or structures, in isolation, will not fall within the scheme. They will only be caught under a mixed contract of work where their installation necessitates other construction work on the building or structure. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14140
CISR14140 - The Scheme: construction operations: fencing | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The erection of fencing may potentially be seen as ‘construction … of … structures’ (FA04/S74 (2)(a)), or ‘construction of … any works forming … part of the land’ (FA04/S74 (2)(b)), or ‘operations which … are for rendering complete (other construction operations)’ (FA04/S74 (2)(f)). Deciding whether a fencing project is within the scope of CIS can be difficult because it may range from a superficial wooden structure enclosing agricultural land, for instance, to a substantial construction involving foundations and a heavy-duty main structure. In addition, the conclusion is influenced by whether the work is done as an isolated job or as part of a wider project of construction in which the erection of fencing represents a finishing operation. In practice, you should base your decision on the following considerations. Within CIS If the fencing is erected as part of a wider project of construction, for example, to enclose gardens on a newly-constructed housing estate, the operation is caught by CIS (this applies whether the fencing is a light or heavy duty structure). If the fencing is erected as an isolated operation and is a heavy duty structure, that is, the main supporting posts are installed in a concrete foundation, the operation is caught by CIS. Excluded from CIS If the fencing is erected as an isolated operation and is a light duty structure, that is the supporting posts are simply driven into the ground, the operation is not caught by CIS. Top of page Security fencing You may encounter claims by fencing concerns that ‘security fencing’ represents a ‘security system’ within the meaning of FA04/S74 (3). Such claims should be rejected on the basis that although fencing may fulfil a security purpose, it is a normal feature of a building and its surrounds. It is not a ‘system’. For more information, see CISR14290 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14150
CISR14150 - The Scheme: construction operations: fixed furniture | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The installation of fixed furniture included in a building undergoing construction, alteration, extension or repair (FA04/S74 (2)(a)) is within the scope of the Construction Industry Scheme. Note that, of itself, the installation of such furniture is considered to represent an alteration or extension of the building. Within CIS Installation of fitted kitchens fitted bedroom furniture fitted bathrooms fitted cupboards and shelving in laboratories, surgeries, hospitals, shops and other locations shopfittings, including fixed shelving, counters, partitions fixed warehouse racking, mobile racking based on a track system. Top of page Excluded from CIS Installation of fixed seating (see CISR14280 ) dental chairs. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14160
CISR14160 - The Scheme: construction operations: fire protection systems | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| FA04/S74 (2)(c) says that the ‘installation in any building or structure of systems of … fire protection’ is within the scope of the Construction Industry Scheme’. In practice, systems concerned with the protection of a building and its occupants tend to fall into the following classes Fire alarm systems providing audible warnings. These are usually triggered by a person. Fire detection systems made up of a network of heat or smoke sensors that automatically trigger audible/visible warnings. Fire detection systems made up of a network of heat or smoke sensors that, in addition to triggering audible/visible warnings, set off structural protection systems such as sprinkler systems. Structural fire protection systems such as sprinkler systems, fireproof cladding and automatic door/Shutter closing mechanisms. Fire alarm systems and fire detection systems limited to providing audible/visible warnings essentially fulfil a public safety function. In that respect they are technically similar to security warning systems (as in 1 & 2 above). The installation of these systems is considered to be outside the scope of CIS. Structural fire protection systems and those fire detection systems that interact with structural protection systems fall squarely within the description of ‘systems of fire protection’ (as in 3 & 4 above). The installation of these systems is caught by CIS. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14170
CISR14170 - The Scheme: construction operations: floor coverings (for example, carpets) | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The fitting of carpets, linoleum, vinyl sheeting and other forms of floor covering is not a construction operation when carried out in isolation, that is, when done in a situation that does not also involve construction work. The fitting of floor coverings may be subject to the Construction Industry Scheme, however, when this is specified as a finishing operation in a wider project of construction. Nowadays it is common for building specifications presented to a ‘main contractor’ to require not only that the mainstream construction work be carried out but also that a particular kind of floor covering be fitted as part of the project. This operation therefore ‘renders complete’ the mainstream construction work and, subject to the type of floor covering, may be within the scope of CIS (FA04/S74 (2)(f)). Broadly, the fitting of all forms of floor covering included in the specification of a building undergoing construction, alteration or repair is caught by CIS but the exception is carpeting. A Statement of Practice (SP12/81) provides that carpet fitting (but no other floor covering) is regarded as excluded from the Scheme even where it is included in the building specifications. Note Carpeting will be caught where it forms part of a mixed contract, for example, the subcontractor is required to fit laminate flooring and fit carpeting under a single contract. ‘Astroturf’ You may receive representations from businesses involved in installing synthetic surfaces in sports grounds and gymnasiums that the material used is ‘carpeting’ and therefore excluded from CIS. Such claims should be rejected on the basis that the Statement of Practice was intended to apply to materials falling within the ordinary meaning of the word ‘carpet’. Top of page Within CIS fitting vinyl, linoleum, stripwood and laminate flooring and other forms of floor covering where carried out as part of a wider project of construction installation of synthetic surfaces in sports grounds, gymnasia and children’s play areas. Top of page Excluded from CIS carpet fitting in all circumstances if it is not part of a mixed contract fitting of carpet tiles fitting vinyl, linoleum and other forms of floor covering where not carried out as part of a wider project of construction. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14180
CISR14180 - The Scheme: construction operations: improvement and housing grants | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Improvement or housing grants are payments awarded under statutory arrangements to property occupiers for the improvement of their properties. They are normally administered by local authorities. One arrangement is that the applicant, having been awarded a grant, engages a construction concern to execute the work and then seeks reimbursement from the local authority. A variant of this is that the applicant arranges for the work to be done but passes payment invoices received from the builder to the local authority for payment out of the grant. In each of these cases the applicant commissions the work so they are not a ‘contractor’ for the purposes of CIS. Where the applicant is a council tenant the local authority is also a party to the grant application. In this case, the local authority then stands as the contractor and CIS applies to any payments made to subcontractors engaged under the contract between the local authority and the subcontractors they engaged to carry out the work. Commonly, however, the applicant is a private householder and so they are not a contractor for the purposes of the Scheme. For that reason CIS does not apply whether payment is made to the builder by the householder or by the local authority. Where payment is made by the local authority out of the grant it does so as an agent or representative of the grant applicant, not as the contracting party. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14190
CISR14190 - The Scheme: construction operations: industrial plant | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| FA04/S74 (2)(b) says that the following operations are within the scope of the Construction Industry Scheme ‘construction, alteration, repair, extension … of any works forming … part of the land, including … industrial plant’ This provision relates to industrial plant founded directly on the land rather than located in a building. The plant referred to includes petrochemical installations chemical plant external conveyer systems storage tanks silos pylons cranes or derricks pumps sewage farms water filtration plants mining winding gear. Often there is no clear division between what can be considered to be ‘works forming part of the land’ (FA04/S74(2)(b)) on the one hand or ‘structures’ (FA04/S74 (2)(a)) on the other. The effect of these provisions, in combination with the other provisions of Section 74, is to bring within the Scheme all construction forming a normal part of the building and civil engineering industries. CIS legislation does not seek to define ‘industrial plant’ but mentions it as an example of ‘work forming part of the land’ to which the Scheme applies. The purpose of citing it is to indicate that, if you are considering an installation founded on the land and which, by common understanding, is industrial plant, it is ‘works forming part of the land’ and its construction is caught by CIS. It is not crucial whether an installation under consideration is strictly ‘industrial plant’ as defined in the construction or any other industry or, indeed, in the Taxes Acts. The important question is - does the installation being considered fall within the description ‘works forming part of the land’? If the answer is ‘Yes’ that is sufficient to bring the operation within the scope of the Scheme. If the installation happens to fulfil an industrial purpose you might reasonably conclude that it is ‘industrial plant’ but that is incidental. Externally located industrial plant As regards the repair of externally located industrial plant, this refers to structural repair only, for example, patching of a chemical retort or replacing a section of pipe-work. In contrast the repair or replacement of mechanical components, for example, work on valves in pumps, is not within the Scheme. Top of page Industrial plant installed in buildings The reference to industrial plant in FA04/S74 (2)(b) relates to industrial plant founded directly on the land as described above, that is, externally located plant. In contrast, the installation of industrial plant in buildings is, in certain circumstances, viewed as either the ‘alteration … extension … of buildings or structures’ (FA04/S74 (2)(a)) or operations which form an integral part of, or are for rendering complete, such construction operations, namely those required to accommodate the equipment (FA04/S74 (2)(f)). Industrial plant installed in buildings can range from heavy machinery closely integrated into the structure of a building designed to accommodate it, to light duty tools only superficially secured to the shop floor. In deciding whether a project involving the installation of such industrial plant is within the scope of CIS, you should consider; how substantial is the plant physically? It may be one large item of machinery, or possibly several smaller items for which the building has to be adapted. how complex is it structurally, that is, is it simply bolted to the floor or does it derive more substantial support from the building structure by being secured to the walls or ceiling/roof such that it can be seen as part of the building? how closely is it integrated into the building structure, that is, is it an element within a complex system involving material flows using conveyers or pipe-work connecting parts of a production line? If the answer to any of these questions is ‘Yes’ it is likely that the installation is within the scope of CIS. The following paragraphs set out examples based on these considerations. Top of page Within CIS Installation of lifts industrial hoists gantries materials processing plant connected by a complex of conveyors or pipe-work secured to the building fabric electronic storage and/or retrieval systems built in or secured to the fabric of a building or structure factory rail systems for transporting materials or goods under-floor guidance systems for robotic vehicles electricity generators (system of power supply) distributed compressed air supplies vehicle-washing systems tanks and silos industrial furnaces (but not free-standing furnaces such as small muffle furnaces) paint spray booths. Top of page Excluded from CIS repair of internally located plant and machinery installation of separate machine tools such as lathes, milling machines and other production machinery only superficially attached to the fabric by being screwed or bolted to the factory floor installation of light-duty or moveable conveyer systems. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14200
CISR14200 - The Scheme: construction operations: landscaping | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| FA04/S74 (2)(f) says that ‘operations which form an integral part of, or are preparatory to, or are for rendering complete (other construction operations including … landscaping’ are within the scope of the Construction Industry Scheme. Where landscaping or similar operations such as tree-felling are carried out as a preparatory measure, or on completion of a construction operation they are subject to CIS. Within CIS landscaping a housing estate, an industrial estate or the surrounds of a house as a finishing operation in a wider project of construction landscaping a location following demolition of buildings or structures the construction of walls, drives, patios and suchlike, as part of ‘routine landscaping’, as these operations will be caught by FA04/S74 (2)(b), as ‘works forming … part of the land’ tree-felling as part of site clearance turf laying as part of a wider project of construction. Top of page Excluded from CIS routine landscaping, gardening, forestry and tree surgery not undertaken in the course of a wider project of construction landscaping open-cast mine areas after mining has ceased (where there are no pit head machinery, buildings or structures). construction of golf courses (if not associated with the construction of buildings such as club houses). cleaning up an undeveloped site prior to onward sale of land Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14210
CISR14210 - The Scheme: construction operations: locksmiths | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The installation of locks in isolation on new buildings or on buildings where ‘construction operations’ have been carried out is outside the scope of the Scheme. This also applies to the installation of security doors and grilles, where no alteration or repair to the building is required. The replacement of locks on a new for old basis is not treated as being within the scope of the Scheme. Where, however, the replacement results in the need for repair or other modification to the door, doorframe or other surrounding surfaces, this is treated as within the Scheme. Excluded from CIS Computerised locking systems (See CISR14290 - security systems for more details). New or replacement locks, where there is no requirement for repair or modification to the door, doorframe or the surrounding structure and surfaces. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14220
CISR14220 - The Scheme: construction operations: manufacture and delivery | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| FA04/S74 (3)(c) and (d) exclude from the Construction Industry Scheme ‘the manufacture of building or engineering components or equipment, materials, plant or machinery or delivery of these things to site’ ‘manufacture of components for systems of heating, lighting, air-conditioning, ventilation, power supply, drainage, sanitation, water supply or fire protection, or delivery of any of these things to site’. Within CIS Installation of manufactured items under ‘supply and fix’ arrangements transportation of materials on site. Top of page Delivery of ready mixed concrete The delivery to site of ready mixed concrete in isolation is outside the scope of the scheme. If, as part of that delivery the subcontractor uses pipe-work merely to enable delivery of the concrete mix directly from the lorry to a specific point on site, and there is no contractual obligation for the subcontractor to ‘lay’ the mix, then the use of pipe-work will also be outside the scheme. Where the subcontractor uses his own pumps to convey the wet mixed concrete through the pipe-work their use will also be outside CIS. Should another business be subcontracted to provide the pumps to move the wet mix around the site, then this will fall within CIS. Top of page Excluded from CIS Manufacture or off-site fabrication of components or equipment, materials, plant or machinery and delivery of these to site (for example, traditional building materials, prefabricated beams and panels, ready-mixed concrete) delivery of road-making materials delivery repair or maintenance of construction plant or hire equipment without an operator (for example, concrete mixers, pumps and skips) manufacture and delivery of materials used in the installation of systems of heating, lighting, air conditioning, ventilation, power supply manufacture and delivery of flooring materials, glazing materials, computer and instrumentation systems, thermal insulation materials, heating and ventilation systems, doors and rolling grills, painting or decorating materials. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14230
CISR14230 - The Scheme: construction operations: mineral extraction | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| FA04/S74 (3)(a) and (b) exclude from the Construction Industry Scheme ‘drilling for, or extraction of, oil or natural gas’ ‘extraction (whether by underground or surface working) of minerals; tunnelling or boring, or construction of underground works for this purpose’. This means that any work connected with the actual physical extraction of minerals is outside the scope of CIS. Extraction is taken to include drilling for and pumping oil and gas the digging and removal of coal and other minerals from underground deposits or surface workings such as an open cast mine quarrying. In addition, where work such as tunnelling, boring, shoring up of tunnels, construction of rail systems, conveyer systems and other work connected with extraction is done underground, this likewise is outside the scope of the Scheme (in contrast, tunnelling done in connection with construction of a main line railway, for instance, would be caught by the Scheme). Note that the exclusion only extends to extraction and construction work done underground. It does not apply to construction work carried out in the surface area of mines on buildings and other works relating to the handling and transportation of the minerals. Thus the construction of administration buildings, bathhouses, surface railways, conveyer systems and processing plant on the surface is subject to CIS in the normal way. Land reclamation Landscaping undertaken in connection with restoring the area previously occupied by mining buildings following demolition is caught by the Scheme. Here, the landscaping represents a finishing operation relative to the demolition which is squarely within the scope of the Scheme (FA04/S74 (2)(a)). Where, however, an area employed for open-cast mining is landscaped after extraction has ceased, the landscaping is not caught because it does not render another construction operation complete. Top of page Within CIS construction of surface buildings and works landscaping mine areas following demolition of surface works. Unlike open-cast mines, underground mines are likely to have various buildings or structures as well as other works forming part of the land, such as pit head machinery, pumps and drills and so FA04/S74 (2)(b) refers. Top of page Excluded from CIS The exclusion applies to drilling and pumping oil and gas physical extraction of minerals underground or on the surface tunnelling, boring and construction of underground works removal of surface soil prior to starting open-cast mining landscaping open-cast mine areas as part of land reclamation. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14240
CISR14240 - The Scheme: construction operations: preparatory, integral and finishing operations FA04/S74 (2)(f) defines as within the scope of the Construction Industry Scheme 'operations which form an integral part of, or are preparatory to, or are for rendering complete, such operations as are previously described in this subsection, including site clearance, earth-moving, excavation, tunnelling and boring, laying of foundations, erection of scaffolding, site restoration, landscaping and the provision of roadways and other access works'. This provision aims to cover those activities that are characteristic features of construction but which are not dealt with specifically in other parts of FA04/S74. Preparatory operations This provision covers preparatory operations that enable construction work proper to proceed such as site preparation site decontamination site clearance (including demolition and tree-felling) Direct collection of road planings (see below) earthmoving on site marking out excavation tunnelling boring (except for surveying purposes) laying foundations erecting scaffolding, falsework and formwork asbestos removal. However, the following activities are not considered to be construction operations delivery of materials, including liquid concrete transport of spoil from site tree-felling and tree surgery in the course of forestry or estate management. Removal of road planings from site Top of page Integral operations This provision covers operations that are an integral part of construction transport of materials on site construction of site facilities plant hire with operator for use on site. disinfecting of reservoirs/water treatment facilities, either during or on completion of their construction cleaning of road surfaces when done as part of the actual construction of the road, for example where the surface needs to be cleaned or damped down prior to the application of a further layer. Top of page Finishing operations This provision covers operations that bring a construction project to completion such as site restoration and landscaping, including pumping out and draining of water installation of instrumentation systems such as building environmental controls installation, structural repair and painting of lamp standards, permanent traffic lights, parking meters, traffic signs and other street furniture dismantling scaffolding, falsework and formwork screeding, and the fitting of flooring and floor-coverings (including vinyl and linoleum but not carpeting) where these form part of the building specification installation of building fittings such as safety eye-bolts kitchen and bathroom fitting tiling fitting of thermal insulation, lagging or soundproofing as part of a wider project of construction shop fitting installation of built-in refrigeration equipment, such as cold stores (not free-standing refrigerators) installation of fixed furniture (except seating) for example, shelving and fixed work stations. However, the following activities are not considered to be construction operations manufacture and delivery of building materials non-structural repair of street furniture (for example, replacement of lighting elements or defective components in traffic lights or parking meters) installation of seating fitting of carpeting (this is excluded in all circumstances) fitting of vinyl and other floor-coverings in premises not undergoing construction or alteration fitting of thermal insulation or soundproofing in premises not undergoing construction where this has no effect on the fabric of the building. in isolation, the hire of temporary free standing traffic lights Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14250
CISR14250 - The Scheme: construction operations: painting or decorating | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| FA04/S74 (2)(e) says that the following operations are within the scope of the Construction Industry Scheme ‘painting or decorating the internal or external surfaces of any building or structure’. As it stands, this provision is straightforward. Painting is the application of a decorative or protective film to a surface. In practice, however, it may not always be obvious that this provision applies because the subcontractor or contractor presents the query in unfamiliar terms. For instance, masonry undergoing restoration is sometimes sprayed with a sealant to prevent atmospheric deterioration. Similarly, a variety of applications are now in use to inhibit vandalism, graffiti or climbing. The application of these coatings may be given various names for technical or marketing purposes but, basically, the surface is being spray painted or coated with a protective film or special purpose paint. Off-site work Occasionally, items will need to be sent to specialist workshops for repair or restoration work, for example cupboard doors removed for French polishing or doors sent away to have existing paintwork stripped and gilding applied. If this work is carried out by a subcontractor in isolation, it will be outside of the scheme. However if the contract requires the subcontractor carrying out the work, to also remove or dismantle the items to be treated and/or to replace them on completion of the treatment, then all the work will fall within CIS. Within CIS paint application, including gilding or gold leaf work to the building or structure varnishing French polishing of fixed furniture or woodwork certain types of damp-proofing treatments ceiling masonry. Excluded from CIS pesticide spraying including insecticidal or pesticidal wood treatment off-site French polishing. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14260
CISR14260 - The Scheme: construction operations: plant hire | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| FA04/S74 (2)(f) states that ‘operations which form an integral part of, or are preparatory to, or are for rendering complete’ other construction operations are within the scope of the Construction Industry Scheme. The use of plant such as scaffolding, cranes, cement mixers, concrete pumps, earth moving equipment and compressors is an integral part of any substantial construction project. Where the contractor hires the plant used from another person they must consider whether CIS applies to the payments. The following rules apply: Payments for the hire of plant without an operator are outside the scope of CIS. Payments for the hire of plant with an operator are subject to CIS. Note: Where a subcontractor has to hire plant in order to carry out construction work, the cost of the plant hire and any consumable items such as fuel needed for its operation, may be treated as materials for the purposes of calculating any deduction on account of tax. This treatment only extends to plant and equipment actually hired by the subcontractor from a third party. If the subcontractor owns the plant employed in executing the work no ‘notional’ deduction for plant hire may be made although consumable items such as fuel may still be treated as ‘materials’. Some subcontractors have said that as they have bought the equipment or plant used, under a ‘hire purchase’ agreement, then they should be entitled to make deductions for plant. However, the fact that they have used hire purchase to obtain plant for the particular job does not entitle them to a deduction as materials for the payments. For more information about the treatment of plant hire payments as ‘materials’ where a deduction needs to be made, see CISR15090 . Tugs, barges, and other vessels When used in the course of constructing docks, marinas and offshore installations these are viewed as construction plant. If, as is generally the case, the vessel is provided with a crew that carries out operations, this represents the hire of plant with operator and is subject to CIS. If, however, the vessel is merely hired, with the contractor providing their own crew, this represents ‘plant hire’ and is not subject to CIS. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14270
CISR14270 - The Scheme: construction operations: professional work | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| FA04/S74 (3)(e) excludes the following operations from the Construction Industry Scheme: ‘the professional work of architects or surveyors, or of consultants in building, engineering, interior or exterior decoration or the laying-out of landscape’. Note that this exclusion does not apply to all ‘professionals’ involved in construction projects on a self-employed basis. It applies to surveyors and architects even though their professional disciplines do or may include supervisory or executive function or responsibility. For other professionals it will only apply to those whose services are consultative, not executive. This means that they stand apart from the execution of construction work or its management. The work of architects or surveyors, if done within their normal professional discipline, is excluded in all circumstances. Other professionals are ‘consultants’ if they supply technical advice, assessments, plans or designs but are not involved in the day-to-day execution or oversight of a construction project. For example, a consulting engineer, interior decorator or draughtsman providing a design may be regarded as a ‘consultant’. They are not in the chain of command running from contractor to the worker. They provide designs, advice or recommendations that are acted upon by others accountable to the main contractor. Bear in mind, however, that there are many people operating in the construction industry who are professionally qualified or provide managerial or supervisory services and who are not, or not exclusively, consultants. They include engineers, clerk of works and project managers. Being closely involved in the execution or supervision of a construction project is a normal part of their work. When operating on a self-employed basis they can be ‘subcontractors’ under a contract relating to construction operations because they are ‘answerable to the contractor for the carrying out of the construction operations by others’ (FA04/S58 (b)). Difficulties Note that the job title may not always clearly indicate whether the professional is acting within their professional discipline. Where the professional’s work is uncertain, you will need to make enquiries to establish the true nature of the work and any available contracts should make the position clearer. The following paragraphs deal with some special cases. Top of page Architects When operating within their normal professional discipline architects are subject to the exclusion. Some architects may go beyond providing a building design, however, and undertake to manage the project for a contractor or client. In this case the architect is additionally acting as a developer or project manager and the exclusion may no longer apply. Top of page Surveyors The exclusion was designed to cover the traditional functions of these ‘professionals’ namely, surveying land and inspecting properties. It may, however, also be extended to subcontractors performing comparable functions in specialised areas of construction. Examples of such work are soil testing industrial radiography non-destructive testing welding inspection environmental testing pipeline inspection (using, for instance, robot vehicles, known as ‘pigs’). Note, though, that if the ‘survey’ goes beyond inspection to include carrying out remedial work, the exclusion no longer applies. This would be true, for instance, if a robot vehicle surveyed a pipeline internally and then made good defective joints as some are designed to do. Occasionally, a surveyor may engage labourers on subcontract terms to carry out work such as digging an inspection trench necessary for the survey, or boring for soil samples. Such work is regarded as part and parcel of the professional work and is not subject to CIS. Top of page Excluded from CIS The exclusion does apply to planning all professional activities of architects, surveyors and other professionals acting in a wholly consultative capacity inspecting or testing. Top of page Within CIS The exclusion does not apply to an architect also acting as a developer professionals (including architects and surveyors) whose work involves project management or supervision site foremen clerks of works engaged in a supervisory capacity. Note; Often, site foremen and clerks of works will be employed on a PAYE basis in which case they will be outside the scheme. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14280
CISR14280 - The Scheme: construction operations: seating, blinds and shutters | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| FA04/S74 (3)(h) excludes from the operation of the Construction Industry Scheme ‘the installation of seating, blinds and shutters’. Excluded from CIS The exclusion applies to fixed seating installed in theatres, restaurants and other locations blinds, curtains and their fittings shutters, that is, louvered shutters films installed as light filters. Top of page Within CIS The exclusion does not apply to fixed furniture installed in a building under construction alteration or repair (see CISR14150 ) fly screens rolling grills. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14290
CISR14290 - The Scheme: construction operations: security systems | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| FA04/S74 (3)(i) excludes from the Construction Industry Scheme ‘the installation of security systems, including burglar alarms, closed circuit television and public address systems’. The intention is to exclude security systems that are dedicated to that purpose. The examples given in the provision, while not exhaustive, suggest that the systems excluded are electronic in character and involve hardware whose installation has no substantial effect on the fabric of the building in which it occurs. The installation must also be a ‘system’, not just a building feature that incidentally fulfils a security purpose. Thus, doors equipped with locks provide a measure of security but they do not represent a ‘system’. Similarly, fencing may deter intruders but it is a traditional feature of buildings and their surrounds, not a security ‘system’ even if it has security features. The installation must not include any construction works forming part of the land. Such works are included in CIS by virtue of FA04/S74(2)(b). Excluded from CIS burglar alarms closed circuit television employed for security purposes public address systems door entry systems (consisting of no more than an electronic lock and a voice communication system) computerised locking systems. Within CIS closed circuit television used for traffic management door access systems (involving installation of a special door or other structural features) gates, barriers, retractable and automatic bollards and other systems of physical security installation of lighting systems (see CISR14090 ) ‘security’ fencing installation of safes integrated into the building structure. Preparatory works on the land such as digging, building/ erecting concrete posts on which to install the CCTV Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14300
CISR14300 - The Scheme: construction operations: sign writing and signboards | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Page is currently under review - please contact CIS Helpline if further information is needed. FA04/S74 (3)(g) excludes from the Construction Industry Scheme ‘sign-writing and erecting, installing and repairing signboards and advertisements’. The exclusion applies to the installation of static display signboards affixed to buildings and other structures and the erection of signboards, unless the erection of the sign forms part of the land. The exclusion does not apply to signs having electrical and mechanical features where the installation requires an electrical connections. Excluded from CIS Wooden and plastic signboards affixed to buildings and other structures sign-writing carried out on shop fronts, shop windows and other locations installation and repair of advertising hoardings repair of electrical and electro-mechanical signs and advertisements. images projected onto a building or structure from stand alone equipment in isolation, the hire of temporary free standing traffic lights (Isolation – ‘something separate and not connected to other things’, the use of temporary traffic management is used whilst construction work is being undertaken, it isn’t permanent, it is short term and won’t be a regular feature, i.e., once the section of road has been completed, the traffic management option chosen will be negated.) signs with support posts which are simply driven into the ground Top of page Within CIS Installation of electrical (including neon) signs installation of electro-mechanical signs and advertisements construction of bus shelters and other street furniture carrying advertising boards permanent traffic lights and road signs application of road markings. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14310
CISR14310 - The Scheme: construction operations: electronic communications apparatus | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| FA04/S74 (2)(b) says that the following operations are within the scope of the Construction Industry Scheme ‘construction, alteration, repair, extension … of works forming … part of the land, including … electronic communications apparatus’. From the framing of this provision it is apparent that the ‘apparatus’ must be sufficiently substantial to constitute ‘works’ founded directly on or within the land rather than located in a building. This means that the provision refers to radio/TV broadcasting masts and towers satellite dishes (founded directly on the land), not domestic equipment cellular telephone equipment (located externally) telephone poles cable networks. radar equipment (founded directly on the land). Telecommunications systems normally located within buildings will not be caught where the installation does not require substantial alteration or repair to the building or structure. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14320
CISR14320 - The Scheme: construction operations: works forming part of the land | CISR14600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| FA04/S74 (2)(b) says that the following operations are within the scope of the Construction Industry Scheme: ‘construction, alteration, repair, extension or demolition of any works forming, or to form, part of the land, including (in particular) walls, roadworks, power-lines, electronic communications apparatus, aircraft runways, docks and harbours, railways, inland waterways, pipe-lines, reservoirs, water mains, wells, sewers, industrial plant and installations for the purposes of land drainage, coast protection or defence’. This provision seeks to catch the construction of civil engineering works other than buildings and structures (that are covered by FA04/S74 (2)(a)). The types of work listed are wide-ranging but the list is not intended to be exhaustive. So, if you encounter a class of work that is not directly specified but you consider that it can properly be described as ‘works forming part of the land’, you are entitled to conclude that it is caught by this provision. Most of the operations mentioned should give contractors no difficulty in deciding whether CIS should be applied. The following paragraphs, however deal with some special cases in the classes mentioned or describe operations that are not mentioned but are considered to be caught by this provision, or refer you to other information panels in this section covering areas of particular difficulty. Walls The construction of conventional brick and masonry walls is caught as is the construction of dry stone walling (walls without mortar). Top of page Wind farms The construction of wind farms are caught by the scheme, including those that are constructed within territorial waters extending 12 nautical miles from the high watermark. Top of page Playground surfaces and equipment Special surfaces installed in playgrounds (see CISR14170 ) represent ‘works forming part of the land’. Playground equipment bolted to or cemented into playground surfaces also represents structures or ‘works forming part of the land’. Top of page Computer and telephone networks See the separate information panel at CISR14130 . Fencing See the separate information panel at CISR14140 . Flagpoles The erection of a flagpole is considered to be a construction operation. Industrial plant See the separate information panel at CISR14190 . Top of page Electronic communications apparatus See the separate information panel at CISR14310 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr14330
CISR14330 - The Scheme: construction operations: index of construction operations This index is provided as an alternative method of locating types of work included or excluded from the scope of CIS. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15010
CISR15010 - The Scheme: payments: introduction This section serves as an introductory overview of the section on payments made under the Construction Industry Scheme. For more detailed coverage use the above links to the information menu or the action guide menu. Specific details of the main components of the Scheme are covered in the following sections: Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15020
CISR15020 - The Scheme: payments: definition A payment is anything paid out by a contractor and includes cash, cheque or credit. An advance, ‘sub’ or a loan is a credit and therefore a payment. This applies whether or not the payment is made directly to the subcontractor (for information about payments made to someone other than the subcontractor, see the separate information panel on ‘Nominees’ inthis section). The term ‘payment’ includes a payment on account a progress or stage payment a retention payment (for more information see the separate information panel in this section) The Scheme only applies to payments actually made by the contractor. If a payment thatis due to the subcontractor is withheld, the Scheme does not apply to that payment. Date of payment (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15030
CISR15030 - The Scheme: payments: 'contras' and 'set-offs' You may encounter the following terms in certain situations where a contractor withholds part of a contract payment. ‘Contra’ A ‘contra’ is a charge for goods or services supplied to the subcontractor. For example, on a contract worth £200, the contractor gives the subcontractor some surplus materials and restricts payment by £50. A ‘contra’ does not reduce the ‘payment’ from which the deduction may have to be made. It is in effect a ‘payment’ by the contractor to the subcontractor. In the example given, and assuming that the materials are not used in carrying out the construction operations, the deduction should be calculated on the full contract value of £200. ‘Set-Off’ A ‘set-off’ arises when a contractor does not make a payment because the contractor believes there has been a breach of contract. For example, £400 of a £2,000 contract is withheld because the work is below standard. The ‘set-off’ reduces the ‘payment’ from which a deduction may have to be made. It is not a payment by the contractor to the subcontractor. In the example shown, the deduction should be made from £1,600. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15040
CISR15040 - The Scheme: payments: retention payments Some contracts relating to construction operations allow the contractor to retain a portion of the contract price for a period after the construction work has been completed. This happens so that if deficiencies in the work done become apparent in this period the final payment can be withheld until the subcontractor has made good the faults. If the contractor is satisfied at the end of this period the payment withheld is released to the subcontractor. These payments are known as ‘retention payments’. There are no special rules for retention payments. They are treated in the same way as any other payments. Whether the retention payment is made gross or under deduction depends on the subcontractor’s payment status at the date of payment, not when the work was done. The retention payment can also be made up of different components, so that a retention payment can be partly a contract payment due, and partly a payment reimbursing the subcontractor for materials supplied for the contract. Retention periods can last for years and it may be that in this period the subcontractor’s circumstances change. The business may cease or gross payment status held when the work was done may no longer be held when a retention payment is due to be paid. On the other hand, a subcontractor who was only entitled to be paid under deduction when the work was done may have qualified for gross payment by the time payment is made entitling them to receive the payment in full. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15050
CISR15050 - The Scheme: payments: nominees and debt factors Nominees Occasionally, a subcontract arrangement may require that the contractor makes payments to a nominee of the subcontractor. CIS is extended to payments to nominees by FA04/S60(1). Where this applies the contractor must verify BOTH the subcontractor and the nominee before making payment. For payment to be made gross to the nominee, both the subcontractor and the nominee must be registered for gross payment. If the subcontractor and the nominee are not both registered for gross payment, payment must be made under deduction at the rate that would apply if the payment is made direct to the subcontractor. This means that if the subcontractor is registered for payment under deduction, the standard rate of deduction must be applied to the payment being made to the nominee. If the subcontractor is not registered, or cannot be verified for any other reason, the payment to the nominee must be made under deduction at the higher rate –regardless of the nominee’s own payment status. The contractor must still make out, and issue to the subcontractor, a payment and deduction statement in the name of the subcontractor. Where a subcontractor entitled to be paid gross suffers a deduction under this procedure, perhaps because the nominee is not registered for gross payment in their own right, the subcontractor may claim an immediate repayment and the claim should be dealt with following the guidance at CISR72090 . Debt Factors A subcontractor may enter into a factoring agreement such that the factor is responsible for collecting the subcontractor’s debts. The factor recovers the debt from the payer (the contractor), retains a portion under the terms of the factoring agreement and pays the balance to the subcontractor. If a subcontractor assigns their right to receive payment to a debt factor, the contractor can make the payment as if it were being made direct to the subcontractor. If we have told the contractor to pay the subcontractor gross, the payment to the debt factor should also be made gross. If we have told the contractor to make a deduction from the payment to the subcontractor, the contractor must make the deduction from the payment to the debt factor. The contractor must still make out and issue to the subcontractor, a payment and deduction statement in the name of the subcontractor. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15060
CISR15060 - The Scheme: payments: materials Section 61(1) Finance Act 2004 A deduction made under the scheme should only be applied to that part of the payment not representing the direct cost of materials to the subcontractor (FA04/S61 (1)). ‘Direct cost’ means what the subcontractor can demonstrate what they directly paid for the materials. The materials used (which are deductible) must specifically relate to the construction contract to which the payment is being made. The materials therefore cannot relate to other construction contracts lying beneath the contract tier we are looking at, as we are looking specifically at the payment being made under a particular construction contract, and not at other payments relating to other construction contracts in lower tiers. Example 1 Company A subcontracts construction work to Company B who, in turn, subcontracts part of that work to Company C. Company B purchases materials which are used by both Company B and C. As the materials used (or to be used) in carrying out the construction operations to which the payment relates were purchased by Company B, only Company B is entitled to the deduction for the material costs. Where subcontractors further down a chain claim a deduction for materials supplied by the main contractor which the subcontractor doesn’t have to pay for from their own business, it follows those materials are not provided under a contract between them and the main contractor. As such, the cost of those materials cannot be deducted before a CIS tax deduction is applied to that subcontractor’s payment. Example 2 Company A subcontracts construction work to Company B. Company B is required to meet the cost of any materials required to complete the construction work, these costs will be reimbursed to Company B by Company A. Company B in turn subcontracts part of the work it is contracted to undertake for Company A to Company C. Under the contract between Company B and Company C, Company C is required to purchase the materials they will use, and Company B is required to reimburse Company C for all its material costs. As Company C has received a reimbursement for the materials they purchased to fulfil the contract they are not entitled to a deduction cost for those materials. Company B is also not entitled to any deduction costs it was required to meet, which includes both those that it purchased directly, and those that its reimbursed Company C for, as it was also reimbursed for the cost of those materials. Note that SI2005/2045 reg 4(3)(b)(iii), makes it the main contractor’s responsibility to be satisfied that the direct cost of materials is reasonable. Materials cost not disclosed or overstated On occasions a contractor may be unable to obtain satisfactory information from the subcontractor about the cost of materials. In this case the contractor may make a reasonable estimate of the cost of materials and apply the deduction to the remainder. You may receive an approach from a subcontractor who is reluctant to disclose the cost of materials because, for instance, they are charging a substantial ‘mark up’ to the contractor. You should advise the subcontractor that the law is clear on this and that if the subcontractor withholds this information the contractor will be entitled to estimate the cost of materials. The contractor should also adopt this approach if the materials charge appears to have been overstated. Under a ‘supply and fix’ contract the subcontractor may claim, for instance, that the charge relates wholly to the supply of equipment (that is, ‘materials’), and that installation is ‘free’. This may be how matters are represented for marketing purposes but in reality the subcontractor incurs a commercial cost for both the equipment and its installation. If the equipment cost is not specified, the contractor must estimate it to determine what part of the overall payment is subject to deduction.Special cases Refer to the information menu for details concerning the treatment of land purchase, plant hire and travel and accommodation expenses paid as ‘materials’. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15070
CISR15070 - The Scheme: payments: land purchases Most construction contracts simply require the subcontractor to carry out construction operations or provide labour for such work and they may also involve the provision ofmaterials. Occasionally, however, a contract may require the subcontractor, for example, a developer,to locate and acquire a site for the development, funds for the land purchase being provided by the contractor. If the commitment to purchase land and arrange for construction work arises from a single contract, strictly, all payments made under that contract are subject to a deduction (materials excepted). This is because FA04/S60(1) says that ‘any payment which is made under a construction contract’ is caught, though FA04/s61(1) goes on to exclude materials. Where a payment made includes an element reimbursing the subcontractor for the purchase ofland on behalf of the contractor, that part of the payment may, be treated as ‘materials’ and is not therefore subject to deduction. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15080
CISR15080 - The Scheme: contract payments: travel, subsistence and accommodation Where a construction contract places an obligation upon a contractor to pay a subcontractor’s expenses (such as travel, subsistence and accommodation expenses) such payments form part of the overall value of the contract, by virtue of FA04/s60. As such they will result in a deduction under the Scheme, by virtue of FA04/s61. An obligation upon a contractor, under a construction contract, to pay a subcontractor’s expenses will fall within FA04/s60 regardless of whether the obligation is written, verbal, express or implied. A payment made in respect of a subcontractor’s expenses will fall within FA04/s60 regardless of whether the contractor pays or reimburses the subcontractor, pays their expenses directly or pays a nominated third party. The total amount deducted by the contractor should reflect the gross amount of the payments due under the contract, including the payment of expenses on the subcontractor’s behalf. (See examples 1 & 2 below). A deduction will not be due where a contractor allows the subcontractor to use the contractor’s own facilities - such as vehicles or accommodation. A deduction will not be due, even if the contractor is paying a third-party for the facilities, provided these payments are not passed on to the subcontractor thereafter. However, such arrangements will not be common and may imply the existence of an employer/employee relationship (subject to PAYE) rather than a contractor/subcontractor relationship (subject to CIS). Where a contractor makes a payment to a supplier in respect of a subcontractor’s travel, subsistence or accommodation it is very likely that this is a contract payment and that a CIS deduction is due on that payment. Where the contractor arranges for a third party to provide accommodation to a subcontractor, such as a local hotelier, if the contractor pays for that accommodation and at no point passes on all (or some) of those costs of providing that accommodation to the subcontractor, then subcontractors Payment Deductions Statement (PDS) should not include any entry relating to accommodation costs. The contractor will account for this expenditure in their own records but the subcontractor must not claim any accommodation expenses as well, as they have not had to pay for or contribute towards its provision. Alternatively, if the contractor passes on all, or some, of the costs of providing the accommodation to the subcontractor, then that amount will be included in the PDS. Example 1 The value of a construction contract is £10,000, including the payment of the subcontractor’s accommodation expenses. The subcontractor’s hotel accommodation costs £1,000. The contractor pays £1,000 directly to the hotel, leaving £9,000 due to the subcontractor. The contractor should make a CIS deduction at the appropriate rate - 20% in this example. The deduction will be £2,000, based on total payments of £10,000. The contractor should give the subcontractor a PDS showing a gross payment of £10,000, with deductions of £2,000 for CIS and £1,000 for accommodation. The subcontractor will receive £7,000. Example 2 The value of a construction contract is £10,000, including the payment of the subcontractor’s fuel costs. The fuel costs come to £2,000, which the subcontractor pays by credit card. The contractor pays £2,000 directly to the subcontractor’s credit card provider. This leaves £8,000 due to the subcontractor. The contractor should make a CIS deduction at the appropriate rate - 20% in this example. The deduction will be £2,000, based on a total payment of £10,000. The contractor should give the subcontractor a PDS showing a gross payment of £10,000, with deductions of £2,000 for CIS and £2,000 for fuel. The subcontractor will receive £6,000. Example 3 The value of a construction contract is £9,000. The contractor allows the subcontractor to use accommodation rented by them. The value of the subcontractor’s accommodation is £1,000, and is never charged to the subcontractor. The contractor has rented the property completely independently of the construction contract. The payment of rent does not result in a deduction and does not have to go onto the subcontractor’s PDS the contractor should make a CIS deduction at the appropriate rate - 20% in this example. This will be £1,800, based upon a total payment of £9,000. The contractor should give the subcontractor a PDS showing a gross payment of £9,000, with deductions of £1,800 for CIS. The subcontractor will receive £7,200. Example 4 The value of a construction contract is £9,000. The contractor invites the subcontractor to use hotel accommodation which they have pre-booked beforehand and is unconnected to the construction contract they are entering into with the subcontractor. The value of that accommodation being made available to the subcontractor is £1,000, and is paid in its entirety by the contractor, who at no point recovers any part of this expenditure from the subcontractor. The payment for the accommodation in these circumstances, does not result in a deduction and does not go onto the subcontractor’s PDS. The contractor should make a CIS deduction at the appropriate rate - 20% in this example. This will be £1,800, based upon a total payment of £9,000. The contractor should give the subcontractor a PDS showing a gross payment of £9,000, with deductions of £1,800 for CIS. The subcontractor will receive £7,200. A contractor engages multiple subcontractors to work on a 3 month construction job. The nature of the work requires those subcontractors to work away from home during the week and stay in overnight accommodation. As the contractor prefers to have all their subcontractors stay in the same hotel for convenient pick-ups & drop offs each day, that contractor contracts with a local hotelier to provide the contractor with 20 hotel rooms each night (Monday to Thursday) for the next 3 months. The arrangement provides that the hotelier will bill the contractor for the provision of those rooms at the end of each of the 3 months, regardless of whether or not those rooms were always fully occupied. The only parties contracting into this accommodation arrangement are the hotelier and the contractor. When first engaging the subcontractors, the contractor offers them free overnight accommodation at that hotel, advising the subcontractors that they will not be billed by the contractor nor the hotelier if they use that accommodation, nor will the cost of its provision be deducted from the construction payments being made to them for providing their services. In this case, if a subcontractor were paid £2500 at the end of each of the 3 months they worked for that contractor, then if that subcontractor was liable to the 20% CIS deduction on their construction payments received, then each CIS PDS would show a gross payment of £2500 with a £500 CIS deduction. The subcontractor would therefore receive a £2000 payment each month. However, again in this example the accommodation arrangement provided that the subcontractor ultimately funded the cost of the accommodation by either (i) the contractor reducing the payments they made to the subcontractor each month to recoup the costs that contractor had incurred in providing the accommodation, or (ii) the subcontractor reimburses the contractor for the arranged accommodation by any other means then the contractor should include the payment on the PDS - subcontractor was liable to the 20% CIS deduction on their construction payments received, accommodation costs totaled £300, then each PDS would show a gross payment of £2500, with £300 accommodation and a £560 CIS deduction. The subcontractor would therefore receive a £2240 payment in each month. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15090
CISR15090 - The Scheme: payments: plant hire as 'materials' Where a subcontractor has to hire plant in order to carry out construction work, the cost of the plant hire and any consumable items such as fuel needed for its operation, may be treated as materials for the purposes of calculating any deduction where the subcontractor does not have gross payment status. Note that this treatment only extends to plant and equipment actually hired by the subcontractor from a third party. If the subcontractor owns the plant employed in executing the work no ‘notional’ deduction for plant hire may be made although consumable items such as fuel used by the plant may still be treated as ‘materials’. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15100
CISR15100 - The Scheme: payments: VAT Where the payment made to the subcontractor is subject to VAT (that is, where the subcontractor is a taxable person for VAT purposes and the payment is in respect of a taxable supply) the amount from which the deduction is made is the payment exclusive of VAT. The subcontractor’s gross payment recorded on the monthly return should be the amount due before VAT is added. Where a payment made to a subcontractor only entitled to payment under deduction, and whois a taxable person for VAT purposes, includes an element representing the cost of materials, the amount which may be excluded from the payment before deduction is made isthe VAT- exclusive cost of materials. On the other hand, where the subcontractor is not registered for VAT, any VAT they had to pay in purchasing any materials used in the contract may be included in the cost of materials when calculating the amount of the deduction. From I June 1984, VAT is chargeable on all building and civil engineering work except: the construction of completely new buildings, and alterations to ‘protected buildings’. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15110
CISR15110 - The Scheme: payments: CITB levy The Construction Industry Training Board (CITB) is an industrial training board responsible for promoting vocational training in the construction industry. It is empowered to impose a levy on employers or contractors in the industry to fund its operations. These include making grants to employers/contractors whose training courses are approved by the CITB. As contractors will often seek to recoup this outlay from their subcontractors, in the context of CIS, you will normally encounter the CITB levy in the form of a deduction made from the gross payment due to a subcontractor. This deduction should be excluded from the ‘Gross amount of payment’ shown on a monthly return. For example, where the agreed contract price is £1,000 (plus VAT) and the CITB levy is,say £7, the sum that should be shown on the monthly return as the gross amount of the payment will be £993. That is the agreed contract payment of £1,000, excluding VAT and less a deduction of £7 for the CITB levy. Whether the CITB levy imposed on employers/contractors is an admissible business expense or how grants made by the CITB are to be treated for income purposes are questions that are outside the scope of CIS. For guidance on these points refer to BIM47605. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15120
CISR15120 - The Scheme: payments: contractor deductions (for example, administration, PLI) On occasions, contractors may make deductions from payments due to subcontractors in respect of: public liability insurance CITB Levy (see CISR15110 ) administrative charges. Since CIS is tax machinery applied to payments made rather than payments due under a contract, CIS only applies to the payment actually made, net of these deductions. Payments in respect of those deductions should therefore be ignored when determining the ‘gross payment’ to be included in the monthly return. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15130
CISR15130 - The Scheme: payments: contractors paying for work done on subcontractor's land Under SI2005/2045 reg 19, mainstream contractors may request authorisation not to apply the Scheme to small contracts or payments for construction operations amounting to less than £1,000 (excluding the cost of materials): where the contractor is paying a subcontractor to undertake work that falls within the Scheme on the subcontractor’s own property, or where the contractor is paying a subcontractor to undertake work on any agricultural property of which the subcontractor is a tenant. An example of this type of payment is where a Utility Company lays a pipeline across some land and pays the land owner or tenant to fill in the hole after the pipeline has been laid. To request authorisation not to apply the Scheme to such payments, contractors should contact the CIS Helpline and give us the following information: details of the construction work to be done who will be doing the work where the work will be done the cost of the work. Where the request for authorisation not to apply the Scheme to payments of this nature satisfies the requirements set out above, you may grant such authorisation. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15140
CISR15140 - The Scheme: payments: expenditure by certain businesses on their own property - 'own-build' What ‘Deemed’ contractor payments are exempted by Reg 22? Under SI2005/2045 reg 22, businesses brought into the Scheme because they spend an average of more than £3 million on construction operations do not need to apply the Scheme to expenditure that relates to property used for the purposes of the business itself, or, if the business is a company other companies within the same group any company of which 50% or more of the shares are owned by the company. The types of properties covered by this exemption include offices warehouses nursing homes leased property used by the business’s group, including property leased by one company to another within the same group any other facilities used for the business. Any incidental use of the property by third parties, such as auditors, project team members who are not employees and security staff, will not affect the exemption. You should also note particularly that SI2005/2045 reg 22 applies to ‘businesses’ as specifically described at FA04/s59(1)(l). This regulation does not apply to, for example, public offices and local authorities. It is important to note that it is the payment that is exempted by SI2005/2045 reg 22. It does not exempt the business itself, nor does it exempt the construction contract. Examples of payments made by Deemed Contractor businesses for construction operations, that are exempted under SI2005/2045 reg 22. A business commissions the building of a new factory/industrial plant, or the extension/alteration of an existing factory/industrial plant, to be solely used for the purpose of that business. A Company commissions the building of new office accommodation, or the refurbishment of existing office accommodation, which is to be used for the purpose of that Company’s business. A retailer commissions the building of a new shop/store, or the refurbishment of an existing shop/store, to be solely used for the purpose of their business. Top of page What ‘Deemed’ contractor payments are not exempted by Reg 22? SI2005/2045 Reg 22 allows ‘deemed’ contractors to exempt construction payments but only ‘in respect of construction operations relating to property used for the purposes of the business of that person.’ This regulation also goes on to state that ‘the property is not used for the purposes of the business of a person if it is for sale or let’ (except where purely incidental), ‘or is held as an investment by that person’. The Scheme must therefore be applied to expenditure for construction work on any of the following types of property: property that is not used for the purposes of the business, such as where it is let for commercial purposes to a third party property that is for sale or to let property that is held as an investment. But note the Amending Regulations, SI2007/672 reg 6 which says “except where the sale or letting of that property is purely incidental to the business of that person”. Where a subcontractor is engaged by a ‘Deemed’ contractor business who is entitled to exempt payments to that subcontractor under SI2005/2045 Reg 22, the exemption does not continue to apply further along any contractual chain. If the subcontractor to the Deemed contractor decides to engage another subcontractor they will become a contractor themselves defined under S57(2) (b)(i) FA/04 and CIS must apply. The majority of contractors in CIS are contractors under this legislative subsection by virtue of this contractual arrangement. Examples of payments made by Deemed Contractor businesses for construction operations not exempted under Reg 22. A supermarket chain contracts with a subcontractor to build them a new store in a development that will also include the construction of some social housing, which the supermarket chain intends letting to tenants. A property investor engages a subcontractor to carry out a £5m refurbishment to a recent property acquisition. As the property is held as an investment, the contract payment to the subcontractor falls within the Construction Industry Scheme. (N.B. Property Investors will only be brought into CIS as deemed contractors, where their expenditure on construction operations exceeds £3m per annum, as per Section 59(1)(L) Finance Act 2004). An Insurance company providing property insurance, directly engages and pays subcontractors to carry out repairs to the properties of their policy holders, rather than making payments directly to the policy holders themselves. The payments for construction operations made by the insurance company do not relate to property used for the purposes of their business. Therefore contract payments made by the insurance company to the subcontractor fall within the CIS. (Note; where the insurance company has expenditure on construction operations to property it uses for the purpose of its own business, the refurbishment of its head office building for example, or its own call centres, then these payments may be exempted under Reg 22). Where a business brought into the Scheme by virtue of it spending an average of £3 million or more on construction operations informs HMRC that all its payments for construction operations will fall within the terms of SI2005/2045 reg 22, you may wish to consider whether the contractor should be de-registered informally from the Scheme. See CISR12060 for more details. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15150
CISR15150 - The Scheme: payments: small payments Under SI2005/2045 reg 18, certain concerns may be authorised not to apply the CIS to small contracts for construction operations. This depends on approval from HMRC. Eligible contractors Only ‘deemed contractors’ may apply to operate the small payments arrangement (SI2005/2045 reg 18(2)(a)). These are commercial entities or public bodies classed as contractors by virtue of their expenditure on construction work but which do not carry out construction operations for other parties (see CISR12030 and CISR12050 ). Mainstream contractors’, that is, entities whose trading activities include carrying out construction work for others, or providing labour for such work (see CISR12040 ), are not eligible to operate the arrangement. An application from such a contractor will be refused on the grounds that entities defined as contractors under FA04/S59 (1)(a) are ineligible. Contract value The contracts for which the arrangement is operated must not have a value exceeding £1,000, exclusive of VAT after adjustment for the cost of materials (SI2005/2045 reg 18(3)). If the contract value net of materials exceeds £1,000 this condition is not satisfied. Any cases in which work, which would normally form one contract, is artificially broken down into several smaller contracts will fall outside the terms of the arrangement. Note: Where it becomes apparent that contracts are being artificially broken a decision will be made as to whether approval should be withdrawn. Conditions An entity is eligible to apply for the small payment exemption subject to the following conditions: they are a deemed contractor for the purposes of section 59(1)(b) to (I) as described in CISR12050 ; they have adequate internal administrative arrangements in place for the placing and payment of small contracts for construction operations; the work which would normally form one contract is not broken down into small contracts, each under £1000 to avoid applying CIS; they accept that any abuse of the arrangement will lead to withdrawal of the approval; and they must notify HMRC of any changes to the arrangement. If an applicant breaches any of the above conditions, HMRC may revoke the exemption and may seek to recover any CIS deductions which should have been made and may charge the relevant penalties and interest for failing to comply with the obligations of the scheme. Application Applications should be made in writing specifying the date from which the arrangement is to be applied and that the eligibility criteria have been met to the CT CIS Centre, see CISR97070 . Applications cannot be made retrospectively. HMRC approval It is important that contractors do not implement the arrangement until precise arrangements have been agreed with HMRC. Once exemption is granted contractors need not reapply. However, if there is a change in circumstances, they must let us know immediately by contacting the CT CIS Centre, see CISR97070 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15160
CISR15160 - The Scheme: payments: small payments arrangement - examination of applications (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15170
CISR15170 - The Scheme: payments: managing agents When a managing agent is acting for a principal or ‘client’ in letting contracts that include construction operations they will not generally be a contractor as defined within the Scheme. This is because the contract for construction operations will more likely be between the principal and the subcontractor. The managing agent’s role would be to see that the work is carried out in accordance with the principal’s contract with the subcontractor and may include making payments to them. Where the contract between the principal and the managing agent includes the maintenance of the property and the agent enters into a contract on their own behalf, even though this is done under the terms of the service contract between the agent and the principal, the agent will be acting as a contractor within the Scheme. Remember that payments made under a contract between the managing agent and the subcontractor may be caught by the Scheme where it is a mixed contract, for example,including elements of security, cleaning, minor repairs and maintenance. When considering such a case you should refer to the section dedicated to ‘construction operations’ at CISR14000 onwards for more on mixed contracts and operations caught by the scheme. Brief details on the scope of construction operations is also covered in Appendices A & B of CIS340 - ‘Construction Industry Scheme. Guide for contractors and subcontractors’, available on . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15180
CISR15180 - The Scheme: payments: payments under a private finance initiative (PFI) arrangement The Private Finance Initiative (PFI) is a form of Public Private Partnership, aimed at enabling the public and private sectors to work more closely together by making use of private capital and expertise in the provision of public sector infrastructure and services. PFI contracts are often for long periods, typically 20-30 years. Common types of PFI include services sold to the public sector – the private sector provides the capital assets and the public purchaser pays only on delivery of the specified services financially free-standing projects – the private sector designs, builds, finances and operates an asset, recovering the costs through direct charges on the private users of the asset joint ventures – the costs of a project are not met entirely by the charges on end users but are subsidised from public funds. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16010
CISR16010 - The Scheme: primary legislation: introduction This paragraph serves as an introduction to the section on the CIS primary legislation.For detailed coverage of particular aspects of the subject use the above link to the menuof information panels. The primary legislation defining the Construction Industry Scheme is contained inFA04/S57-77 and FA04/SCH11 & 12. The secondary legislation is found in The Income Tax(Construction Industry Scheme) Regulations 2005 (SI2005/2045). See CISR17000 onwards for more information on the secondary legislation. This section summarises the provisions contained within the primary legislation and dealswith difficulties in interpretation that may arise. This section does not provide procedural detail so there are no action guides. Detailedinformation about procedures relating to particular provisions is provided in other areasof the CIS Guidance. These are identified in this section where appropriate. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16020
CISR16020 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 57 This is a short introductory section outlining the main elements of the scheme,including reference points in respect of: what payments are affected by the scheme: FA04/S57 (1) what is meant by the term ‘construction contract’: FA04/S57 (2) definition of ‘contractor’: FA04/S57 (3) registering for gross payment: FA04/S57 (4)(a) registering for payment under deduction: FA04/S57 (4)(b) It also provides for the CIS provisions to be treated as part of the Taxes Acts. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16030
CISR16030 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 58 This section provides a definition of a subcontractor. A person is a subcontractor if, under the terms of a contract for construction operations,they are under a duty to carry out construction operations, that is, are under a contractual obligation to execute operations specified in the contract (for example, a construction concern commissioned to erect a building): FA04/S58 (a) furnish their own labour for carrying out construction operations (for example, a labour- only subcontractor): FA04/S58 (a) if a company, furnish the labour of the employees or officers of the company for carrying out construction operations (for example, a company supplying the personal services of its principals or employees): FA04/S58 (a) furnish the labour of other parties for carrying out construction operations (for example, a gang-leader or labour agency): FA04/S58 (a) are answerable to the contractor for the carrying out of construction operations by others (for example, developers and site managers): FA04/S58 (b) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16040
CISR16040 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 59 This section defines a contractor. A contractor is someone who is carrying on a business which includes construction operations, that is, a person whose activities include executing or arranging for construction operations, or supplying labour for such operations: FA04/S59 (1)(a) any public office or department of the Crown (including any Northern Ireland department and any part of the Scottish Administration): FA04/S59 (1)(b) the Corporate Officer of the House of Lords, the Corporate Officer of the House of Commons and the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body: FA04/S59 (1)(c) any local authority: FA04/S59 (1)(d) any development corporation or new town commission: FA04/S59 (1)(e) the Commission for the New Towns: FA04/S59 (1)(f) the Secretary of State in respect of contracts made under section 89 of the Housing Associations Act 1985: FA04/S59 (1)(g) the Housing Corporation, a housing association, a housing trust, Scottish Homes, and the Northern Ireland Housing Executive: FA04/S59 (1)(h) any NHS trust: FA04/S59 (1)(i) any HSS trust: FA04/S59 (1)(j) any body or person specifically named in regulations as a contractor: FA04/S59 (1)(k) any person carrying on a business whose expenditure on construction operations in the three years ending with the last period of account or lesser period exceeds certain limits: FA04/S59 (1)(l) The remaining subsections of Section 59 provide for the public bodies specified in FA04/S59 (1) (b) to (f) or (h) to (k) to be regarded as contractors only when their average expenditure on construction operations exceeds £1 Million a year for the three years ending at the preceding 31 March: FA04/S59 (2)(a) the public bodies mentioned above to cease to be regarded as contractors when their expenditure for the three years ending at the preceding 31 March falls below £1 Million a year in each of those years: FA04/S59 (2)(b) the businesses specified in FA04/S59 (1)(l) to cease to be regarded as contractors when their average expenditure on construction operations falls below £1 Million in each of three years ending with the last period of account: FA04/S59 (3) where all or part of a company’s trade is transferred to another company, construction expenditure incurred by the transferring company to the date of transfer to be apportioned in determining whether either company should be treated as a contractor: FA04/S59 (4) definitions of the expressions ‘development corporation’, ‘housing association’, ‘housing trust’, ‘new town commission’, ’NHS trust’ and ‘HSS trust’ by reference to the legislation governing these bodies: FA04/S59 (5) clarification of the use of the term ‘a body or person’: FA04/S59 (6) HM Revenue & Customs may by regulation remove from this section any references to bodies that have ceased to exist: FA04/S59 (7) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16050
CISR16050 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 60 Payments to which the scheme must be applied are known as ‘contract payments’. Thissection defines a contract payment. A contract payment is any payment made by a contractor, under a construction contract, to a subcontractor: FA04/S60 (1)(a) a person nominated by the subcontractor or the contractor: FA04/S60 (1)(b) a person nominated by a person who is a subcontractor under another such contract relating to all or any of the construction operations: FA04/S60 (1)(c) The purpose of sub-sections (b) and (c) is to ensure that payments are attributed tothe subcontractor undertaking the construction operations rather than to the personactually receiving the payment. Not all payments made under a construction contract are contract payments: FA04/S60 (2).The exceptions are: payments treated as made under a contract of employment under the labour agency provisions: FA04/S60 (3) where the person receiving the payment is registered for gross payment at the time the payment is made FA04/S60 (4) - for partnership rules please see FA04/S60 (5) and (6) any payment prescribed by HM Revenue & Customs in regulations: FA04/S60 (7) See SI2005/2045 reg 18 to 24. A payment which is due to a person within sub-section (1) but is paid to a person notwithin that sub-section is treated as made to the person within sub-section (1): FA04/S60(8) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16060
CISR16060 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 61 This section covers the deductions to be made from contract payments. after making allowances for the direct cost of materials, contractors must deduct the relevant percentage from all contract payments made: FA04/S61 (1) the ‘relevant percentage’ will be an amount to be determined by the Treasury: FA04/S61 (2) the limits governing the relevant percentage for registered and unregistered persons are the basic and higher rates of income tax respectively: FA04/S61 (3) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16070
CISR16070 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 62 This section explains how the deductions made from contract payments should be dealtwith deductions must be paid over to HMRC: FA04/S62 (1)(a) the deduction does not reduce the amount of the payment for income or corporation tax purposes: FA04/S62 (1)(b) Where the subcontractor is not a company, the deductions will be treated as income tax paid in respect of relevant profits: FA04/S62 (2), and where the amounts deducted exceed the liability to income tax, any excess used to discharge Class 4 contributions due: FA04/S62 (2) Where the subcontractor is a company sums will be treated as paid on account ofrelevant liabilities in accordance with regulations – FA04/S62 (3)(a) See SI2005/2045reg 56 this sum to be off-set against relevant liabilities in the year of assessment in which the deduction is made: FA04/S62 (3)(b) if relevant liabilities are satisfied leaving an excess of deductions then remaining sums may be set against corporation tax: FA04/S62 (3)(c) any surplus amounts can be repaid: FA04/S62 (3)(d) The remaining sub-sections cover a definition of ‘relevant liabilities’ as liabilities as an employer or contractor: FA04/S62 (4) definition of certain terms used for the purposes of the section: FA04/S62 (5) clarifies references to ‘regulations’: FA04/S62 (6) allows the regulations to include supplementary, incidental or consequential provisions: FA04/S62 (7) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16080
CISR16080 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 63 This section deals with the registration process. If documentation prescribed in regulations is satisfactorily provided, HMRC must register the individual or company: FA04/S63 (1) See SI2005/2045 reg 25 If an individual, partnership or company can satisfy the requirements in S64, HMRC must register for gross payment: FA04/S63 (2) In all other cases the applicant must be registered under deduction: FA04/S63 (3) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16090
CISR16090 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 64 This section covers the requirements for those wanting to register for gross payment. An individual applying for gross payment status as a sole trader must satisfy the conditions outlined in Part 1 of FA04/SCH11: FA04/S64 (2) An individual or company applying for gross payment status as a partner in a firm must meet the conditions in Parts 1 and 3 of FA04/SCH11 respectively and the firm itself must meet the conditions in Part 2 of FA04/SCH11: FA04/S64 (3) Companies applying for gross payment status must meet the conditions in Part 3 of FA04/SCH11: FA04/S64 (4) If the Board so directs the directors of the company: FA04/S64 (5(a) persons who are beneficial owners of shares (where the company is a close company): FA04/S64 (5)(b), or all or some of the directors or beneficial shareholders of the applicant company – to be stipulated by HMRC: FA04/S64 (5)(c) must meet the conditions in Part 1 of FA04/SCH11 to the extent specified. The remaining sub-sections in this section: FA04/S64 (6) refers to the Board’s powers at FA04/S65 (1) to make a direction under FA04/S64 (5) where there has been a change in control of the company. FA04/S64 (7) defines ‘director’. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16100
CISR16100 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 65 This section outlines the Board’s powers where the control of a company changes. The Board may make a direction under FA04/S64 (5) where there has been a change in control of a company which is registered for gross payment: FA04/S65 (1)(a) or is applying to be registered for gross payment: FA04/S65 (1)(b) The Board may make regulations requiring information in connection with the change in control of a company registered for gross payment: FA04/S65 (2)(a) or a company applying to be registered for gross payment: FA04/S65 (2)(b) See SI2005/2045 reg 53 FA04/S65 (3) provides the definition of ‘control’ Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16110
CISR16110 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 66 This section sets out the circumstances in which a registration for gross payment may be cancelled. Where cancellation of gross payment status under FA04/S66 (1) takes place, it will be effective from the end of the period prescribed in regulations: FA04/S66(2) The Board may cancel gross payment status where: a registered person would fail to meet the requirements if applying at that time: FA04/S66 (1)(a) an incorrect return or incorrect information is provided (whether as a contractor or subcontractor) in connection with any obligations under the scheme: FA04/S66 (1)(b), or there is a failure to comply with any obligations arising under, or in connection with any provision of the scheme: FA04/S66 (1)(c) The registration may be cancelled with immediate effect: FA04/S66 (4) where the Board has reasonable grounds to suspect that a subcontractor registered for gross payment status: using false information: FA04/S66 (3)(a) has fraudulently made an incorrect return or has fraudulently provided incorrect information (whether as a contractor or subcontractor) in connection with a CIS, PAYE, ITSA, CTSA or VAT obligation: FA04/S66 (3)(b), or knowingly failed to comply with an obligation arising under, or in connection with the provision of the scheme: FA04/S66 (3)(c) On cancelling a registration for gross payment under this section the Board must without delay, notify the subcontractor giving the reasons for cancellation: FA04/S66 (5). Where cancellation of gross payment status is determined under FA04/S66 (1), the subcontractor must be registered for payment under deduction: FA04/S66 (6). Where a subcontractor's gross payment status is cancelled under FA04/S66 (3), the Board can use its own judgement as to whether registration for payment under deduction is appropriate: FA04/S66 (7). If a subcontractor's gross payment status is cancelled in line with sub-sections (2) and (4) of this section and FA04/S67 (5), they cannot re-apply for gross payment status within one year of the cancellation taking effect: FA04/S66 (8). FA04/S66 (9) allows 'a prescribed period' to be defined in regulations. See Regulation 26, SI2005/2045. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16120
CISR16120 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 67 This section sets out the appeals process where registration for gross payment status has been refused or cancelled. A person whose application for gross payment is refused: FA04/S67 (1)(a), or registration for gross payment status is cancelled: FA04/S67 (1)(b) may give notice of appeal: FA04/S67 (1) A notice of appeal must be given to the Board within 30 days of the refusal or cancellation: FA04/S67 (2) and must provide the reasons why the person believes the refusal or cancellation was wrong: FA04/S67 (3) The tribunal’s powers to review the Board’s decision are set out at FA04/S67 (4) Where a determination is made under FA04/S66 (1) to cancel a registration for gross status, the subcontractor can retain gross payment status until the appeal is abandoned: FA04/S67 (5)(a) the Tribunal determine the appeal: FA04/S67 (5)(b) the appeal is determined by the Upper Tribunal or a court: FA04/S67 (5)(c). Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16130
CISR16130 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 68 This section provides the powers for the Board to make regulations in respect of the cancellation of a registration for payment under deduction: FA04/S68 (a), and an appeals process against the refusal or cancellation of a registration for payment under deduction: FA04/S68 (b) See SI2005/2045 reg 25. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16140
CISR16140 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 69 This section deals with the verification process. Where a contractor is due to make a contract payment or a payment which would be a contract payment but for S60 (4), the Board may make regulations requiring them to verify with the Board - except in prescribed circumstances - that the person to whom they are making the payment is registered for gross payment or for payment under deduction: FA04/S69 (1) In making regulations under FA04/S69 (1) the Board may set conditions preventing the use of the verification service unless prescribed conditions have been met: FA04/S69 (2)(a) the length of time for which the verification remains valid: FA04/S69 (2)(b) The Board may make regulations requiring that they notify those making contract payments that a person registered for gross payment has either moved to payment under deduction or has ceased to be registered: FA04/S69(3)(a) a person registered for payment under deduction has either moved to gross payment status or has ceased to be registered: FA04/S69(3)(b) Provisions that may be made under sub-sections (1) and (3) of this section includes the entitlement for a contractor to assume, except in prescribed circumstances, that payment instructions received during the verification process have not changed: FA04/S69 (4) FA04/S69 (5) provides a definition of ‘prescribed’. See SI2005/2045 reg 6. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16150
CISR16150 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 70 This section deals with periodic returns of payments made under construction contracts. The Board may make regulations requiring contractors to submit a return of payments made at intervals to be prescribed by the Board: FA04/S70 (1)(a) See SI2005/2045 reg 4. keep relevant records of the payments: FA04/S70 (1)(b) See SI2005/2045 reg 51; and provide information in respect of those to whom the payments were made: FA04/S70 (1)(c) See SI2005/2045 reg 4. Any provision made by regulation under sub-section (1)(a) should include a requirement, except in prescribed circumstances, for the contractor to declare on the return that none of the payments made relate to contracts of employment: FA04/S70 (2)(a) declare on the return that all subcontractors listed have had their payment status verified, where this is required: FA04/S70 (2)(b) provide such information and in such format as required by the Board: FA04/S70 (2)(c) submit a nil return where no payments have been made during the relevant period: FA04/S70 (2)(d) The Board may make regulations in respect of the copying and removal of and making extracts from any records kept in accordance with sub-section (1)(b) and of access to such records or copies: FA04/S70 (3)(a) and (b) See SI2005/2045 reg 51. The Board may make regulations allowing a person making payments under a construction contract to appoint another to act on their behalf and to prescribe the rights, obligations or liabilities to the appointed person: FA04/S70 (4) See SI2005/2045 reg 5. FA04/S70 (5) defines ‘prescribed’ Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16160
CISR16160 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 71 This section deals with the collection and recovery of deductions The Board must make regulations relating to the collection and recovery of amounts deducted under S61: FA04/S71 (1) See SI2005/2045 reg 7 to 16. The regulations may include any matters in respect of which PAYE regulations may be made: FA04/S71 (2) Interest required by regulations should be paid without the deduction of income tax and should not be taken into account in computing income, profits or losses for tax purposes: FA04/S71 (3) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16170
CISR16170 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 72 This section deals with penalties in connection with an application for registration. If, in connection with an application for registration for gross payment or for payment under deduction, an applicant makes any statement, or furnishes any document, which they know to be false or recklessly makes such a statement or furnishes such a document, they will be liable to a penalty not exceeding £3000: FA04/S72 (a) and (b) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16180
CISR16180 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 73 This section provides the Board with supplementary powers to make regulations inconnection with documents and records. As they consider necessary or expedient, the Board may by regulation make other provisions for giving effect to this Chapter: FA04/S73 (1) Provisions made under sub-section (1) may include modifying the application of the Chapter where a person acts as an agent of a contractor or subcontractor: FA04/S73 (2)(a) a person’s right to payment is assigned or transferred to another: FA04/S73 (2)(b) Regulations may make different provision for different cases: FA04/S73 (3) The Board has the power to make regulations allowing a person who is not an officer of the Board to request and receive information and documents on the Board’s behalf: FA04/S73 (4) See SI2005/2045 reg 51 and 52. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16190
CISR16190 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 74 This section defines what is and what is not a construction operation. References to ‘construction operations’ in this section includes the work of individuals participating in the carrying out of such operations but does not include operations undertaken outside of the United Kingdom: FA04/S74 (1) The following are, subject to sub-section (3), construction operations construction, alteration, repair, extension, demolition or dismantling of buildings or structures (whether permanent or not), including offshore installations: FA04/S74 (2)(a) construction, alteration, repair, extension or demolition of any works forming, or to form, part of the land, including (in particular) walls, roadworks, power-lines, electronic communications apparatus, aircraft runways, docks and harbours, railways, inland waterways, pipe-lines, reservoirs, water-mains, wells, sewers, industrial plant and installations for purposes of land drainage, coast protection or defence: FA04/S74 (2)(b) installation in any building or structure of systems of heating, lighting, air- conditioning, ventilation, power supply, drainage, sanitation, water supply or fire protection: FA04/S74 (2)(c) internal cleaning of buildings and structures, so far as carried out in the course of their construction, alteration, repair, extension or restoration: FA04/S74 (2)(d) painting or decorating the internal or external surfaces of any building or structure: FA04/S74 (2)(e) operations which form an integral part of, or are preparatory to, or are for rendering complete, such operations as are previously described in this subsection, including site clearance, earth-moving, excavation, tunnelling and boring, laying of foundations, erection of scaffolding, site restoration, landscaping and the provision of roadways and other access works: FA04/S74 (2)(f) The following are not construction operations drilling for, or extraction of, oil or natural gas: FA04/S74 (3)(a) extraction (whether by underground or surface working) of minerals and tunnelling or boring, or construction of underground works, for this purpose: FA04/S74 (3)(b) manufacture of building or engineering components or equipment, materials, plant or machinery, or delivery of any of these things to site: FA04/S74 (3)(c) manufacture of components for systems of heating, lighting, air-conditioning, ventilation, power supply, drainage sanitation, water supply or fire protection, or delivery of any of these things to site: FA04/S74 (3)(d) the professional work of architects or surveyors, or of consultants in building, engineering, interior or exterior decoration or in the laying-out of landscape: FA04/S74 (3)(e) the making, installation and repair of artistic works, being sculptures, murals and other works which are wholly artistic in nature: FA04/S74 (3)(f) signwriting and erecting, installing and repairing signboards and advertisements: FA04/S74 (3)(g) the installation of seating, blinds and shutters: FA04/S74 (3)(h) the installation of security systems, including burglar alarms, closed circuit television and public address systems: FA04/S74 (3)(i) The Treasury, by order, may amend sub-sections (2) and (3) by adding, varying or removing any description of operations: FA04/S74 (4) Any order made under sub-section (4) must be approved by a resolution of the House of Commons: FA04/S74 (5) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16200
CISR16200 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 75 This section defines ‘the Inland Revenue’: FA04/S75 (1) defines ‘the Board of Inland Revenue’: FA04/S75 (2) allows the Board to make regulations delegating their powers under S63, 64(5) and 66: FA04/S75 (3) See SI2005/2045 reg 50. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16210
CISR16210 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 76 This section gives effect to Schedule 12 of the Act Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16220
CISR16220 - The Scheme: primary legislation: section 77 This section deals with the commencement of the new scheme and certain transitionalarrangements. That the new scheme has effect in relation to payments made on or after the appointed day: FA04/S77 (1) Those with gross payment certificates in force immediately before the appointed day will be automatically registered in the new scheme with gross payment status: FA04/S77 (2) Those with registration cards in force immediately before the appointed day will be automatically registered in the new scheme with net payment status: FA04/S77 (3) After the appointed day, a contractor who has paid a subcontractor in the current or previous two tax years can continue to pay them using the same payment status, unless the contractor has reason to believe that it has changed: FA04/S77 (4) Where a contractor has made payments to a subcontractor in the current or two previous tax years, there is no requirement to verify that subcontractor: FA04/S77 (5) Where verification is not a requirement, the contractor can continue to pay the subcontractor in accordance with their current payment status, unless otherwise notified: FA04/S77 (6) The ‘appointed day’ will be set by Treasury Order: FA04/S77 (7) Further supplemental and transitional provisions may be made by Treasury Order: FA04/S77 (8) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16230
CISR16230 - The Scheme: Primary legislation: schedule 11: part 1 PART 1: Conditions to be satisfied by individuals Para 1: Where an individual is applying for gross payment status as a sole trader they must satisfy the business, turnover and compliance tests as set out at paras 2, 3 and 4 of Schedule 11. Where an individual is applying for gross payment status as a partner in a firm, paras 2 and 3 do not apply. Para 2: An applicant must provide evidence, as prescribed by the Board in regulations, to show that they are carrying on a business in the United Kingdom which carries out construction operations itself or arranges for others to carry out construction operations, and that the business is largely conducted through a bank account. See SI2005/2045 reg 27. Para 3: An applicant must provide evidence, as prescribed in regulations made by the Board, that their business, in the year following the application, likely will receive relevant payments at least equal to the minimum turnover requirement specified in regulations. See SI2005/2045 reg 28(1) and 29. A 'relevant payment' is a payment made under contracts for construction operations carried out by the applicant, or others supplied by the applicant, which fall within the scope of the scheme (FA04/S74 (2)) but not works outside the scope of the scheme (FA04/S74 (3)). In calculating turnover, the relevant payment should exclude the direct cost of materials. (3) The Board may make regulations that, in certain circumstances, allow businesses that do not meet the conditions at (1) to be treated as having met the turnover test. See SI2005/2045 reg 31. Para 4: Subject to (3) and (4) below, during the qualifying period the applicant must have met all requests for information and complied with the following obligations to: If an applicant had control of a company during the qualifying period, they cannot satisfy the conditions in (1) above unless the company can also satisfy those conditions. This sub-section also defines 'control'. An applicant who has failed to comply with obligations under (1) may be treated as having met those obligations if the failures are of a kind prescribed in regulations. See SI2005/2045 reg 32 An applicant can be regarded as satisfying the conditions in (1) if there is a reasonable excuse for non-compliance and the applicant complied once the reasonable excuse had ended without unreasonable delay. Where an applicant states they have not been subject to one or more of the obligations laid down by (1) they must produce evidence to support that statement, as prescribed in Board regulations. See SI2005/2045 reg 35 and 36. If for that purpose an applicant claims to have been outside the United Kingdom they must produce evidence, as prescribed in Board regulations, to show they have complied with any comparable tax obligations in any country in which they have lived during the qualifying period. See SI2005/2045 reg 33 and 34. An applicant must, when due, have paid any Social Security Contributions which became payable during the qualifying period. There must be reason to expect that an applicant will continuously comply with the obligations set out in (1) to (6) and any requests referred to at (1). This section stipulates that not only must the applicant have met all their tax obligations in full but have also done so on time. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16240
CISR16240 - The Scheme: primary legislation: schedule 11: part 2 PART 2: Conditions to be satisfied by firms Para 5: Where an individual or company wishes to apply to be registered for gross payment status as a partner in a firm, the following conditions must be met. Para 6: Applicants must provide evidence, in accordance with Board regulations, to show that the firm's business is carried on in the United Kingdom; that it carries out construction operations itself or arranges for others to carry out construction operations, and that the business is largely conducted through a bank account. See SI2005/2045 reg 27. Para 7: Para 8: Unless covered by sub-sections (2) and (3) below, during the qualifying period the applicant must have met all requests for information and complied with the following tax obligations to: A firm can be treated as meeting the compliance obligation in respect of any partner where that partner's failures are of kind set out in regulations made by the Board. See SI2005/2045 reg 32 A partner can be regarded as satisfying the conditions in (1) if there is a reasonable excuse for non-compliance and the partner complied with the obligation once the reasonable excuse had ended without unreasonable delay. There must be reason to expect that partners in the firm will continuously comply with the obligations and requests set out in (1). This paragraph stipulates that not only must all partners in the firm have met all their tax obligations in full but must also have done so on time. Para 8A: The compliance test is treated as satisfied by the firm if, at the time of the application one or more of the partners already holds gross payment status and that partner or those partners together have a right to a share of at least half of the assets, or at least half of the income of the firm. However, if the firm were to gain gross payment status in this way, the partner who already holds gross payment status cannot have been also granted it in this way or in the equivalent way for companies. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16250
CISR16250 - The Scheme: primary legislation: schedule 11: part 3 PART 3: Conditions to be satisfied by companies Para 9: Where a company wishes to be registered for gross payment, whether as a partner in a firm or otherwise, the following conditions must be met. Para 10: The company must provide evidence, in accordance with regulations, to show that the firm's business is carried on in the United Kingdom; that it carries out construction operations itself or arranges for others to carry out construction operations, and that the business is largely conducted through a bank account. See SI2005/2045 reg 27. Para 11: The company must provide evidence, as prescribed in regulations, that their business, in the year following the application, will receive relevant payments at least equal to the minimum turnover requirement, or that those holding shares in the company are themselves companies with gross payment status. See SI2005/2045 reg 2 "'Relevant payment' has the meaning described in para 3(2)" Minimum turnover, as specified in (1)(a) above, is whichever is the smaller of the minimum amount multiplied by the number of relevant persons in the company, see SI2005/2045 reg 30, or an amount specified in regulations. See SI2005/2045 reg 28(3). A 'relevant person' , as specified in (2)(a) above, is for a close company, a director (see S67 IT (Earnings and Pensions) Act 2003) or a beneficial holder of shares in the company, and in all other cases, a director of the company. The Board can make regulations to determine the number of relevant persons to be taken into account in accordance with (2) above, that is where, over a period, the number of such persons has fluctuated, See SI2005/2045 reg 30 and in prescribed circumstances, allow companies that do not meet the conditions at (1) to be treated as having met the turnover test. See SI2005/2045 reg 31. Para 12: The company must have, subject to (2) and (3), during the qualifying period the applicant must have met all requests for information and complied with the following tax obligations to: The Board may make regulations allowing a company to be treated as having satisfied the qualifying conditions. See SI2005/2045 reg 32. A company can be regarded as satisfying the conditions in (1) if there is a reasonable excuse for non-compliance and the company complied once the reasonable excuse had ended. The company must have paid any National Insurance Contributions when due. During the qualifying period the company must have complied with the following obligations under the Companies Act 2006: There must be reason to expect that the company will continue to comply with all its obligations. This paragraph stipulates that not only must the applicant have met all their tax obligations in full but have also done so on time. Para 12A: Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16260
CISR16260 - The Scheme: primary legislation: schedule 11: part 4 PART 4: Supplementary Provisions Para 13: Provides the power to amend conditions for registration for gross payment. Allows the Treasury, by statutory instrument, to alter the conditions for gross registration. Any statutory instrument under (1) must be subject to a positive resolution of the House of Commons. Para 14: Defines the 'qualifying period' as the 12 months ending with the date of application. Para 15: Allows the Board to base presumptions of future conduct on the evidence of past conduct. Para 16: For the turnover test (S3(1), S7(1), S11(1)) the Board may make regulations allowing different provisions to be applied for the registration for gross payment depending on whether the person is applying for registration for gross payment, or the Board are considering cancellation of a registration for gross payment. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr16270
CISR16270 - The Scheme: primary legislation: schedule 12 Section 76: Construction Industry Scheme, Consequential Amendments Schedule 12 makes consequential amendments to other legislation. Para 1: This amends TMA70/S12B to replace the reference in subsection 4A(b) to vouchers with,effectively, reference to sub-contractor statements under SI2005/2045 reg 4(8). Para 2: This amends TMA70/S59D to replace the reference in sub-section (4)(d) to the old CISregulations with a reference to new regulations under FA04/S62 (treatment of sumsdeducted). Para 3: This amends TMA70/S59DA to replace the reference in subsection (7) to ICTA88/S559 witha reference to FA04/S61. Para 4: This amends TMA70/S62 to replace the reference in sub-section (1A)(b) to ICTA88/S559with a reference to FA04/S61. Para 5: This amends TMA70/S63 to replace the reference in sub-section (3)(b) to ICTA88/S559with a reference to FA04/S61. Para 6: This amends TMA70/S64 to replace the reference in sub-section (1A)(b) ICTA88 with areference to FA04/S61. Para 7: This amends TMA70/S98 by deleting the reference in the first column of the Table tosection 561(8) and adding a reference to regulations under FA04/S70 (3) and by deletingthe reference in the second column of the Table to regulations under section 566(1), (2)or (2A) and adding a reference to regulations under section 65(2), 69(1), 70(1)(a) or (c)or 71 FA04. Para 8: This amends TMA70/S98A by replacing the reference in sub-section (1) to ICTA88/S566 (1)with a reference to section 70(1)(a) or 71 FA04. In sub-section (2)(b) it inserts, after ‘not exceeding’, ‘(i) in the case of a provisionof PAYE regulations’ and, at the end ‘in the case of a provision of regulations undersection 70(1)(a) or 71 of the Finance Act 2004, £3,000’. This applies a penalty of up to£3,000 to monthly returns outstanding after 12 months. In sub-section 4(a), after ‘year of assessment’ it inserts ‘(in the case of a provision ofPAYE regulations) or period (in the case of a provision of regulations under section70(1)(a) or 71 of the Finance Act 2004.’ This extends the tax-geared penalty to CISmonthly returns. Para 9: This removes chapter 4 of part 13 of ICTA. Para 10: This amends ICTA88/S582A by replacing the reference in sub-section (6) to section560(2) with a reference to FA04/S59. Para 11: This amends ICTA88/S829 by replacing references in sub-section (2A) to chapter 4 ofpart 13 of this Act with a reference to chapter 3 of part 3 of FA 04. It also replaces thereference to section 559 with a reference to FA04/S61. Para 12: This amends FA88/S130 by replacing the reference in sub-section (7)(d) to section559(4) of that Act with a reference to FA04/S61. Para 13: This amends schedule 1 to the Social Security Contributions and Benefits Act 1992 byreplacing the reference in paragraph 7 to ICTA88/S566 (1) with a reference to section70(1)(a) or 71 of FA 04. Para 14: This amends schedule 1 to the Social Security Contributions and Benefits (NorthernIreland) Act 1992 by replacing the reference in paragraph 7 to ICTA88/566 (1) with areference to section 70(1)(a) or 71 of FA 04. Para 15: This amends FA98/S56 by replacing the reference in sub-section (8) to Chapter 4 of Part13 of ICTA with a reference to FA04/S74. Para 16: This amends FA98/SCH18 by deleting the text in sub-paragraph 22(3)(b) and inserting areference to records required by regulations under section 70(1)(c) FA 04. Para 17: This amends ITEPA03/S54 by replacing the reference in sub-section (2) to section 559ICTA with a reference to FA04/S61. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17010
CISR17010 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: introduction This paragraph serves as an introduction to the section on the CIS secondary legislation. For detailed coverage of particular aspects of the subject use the above linkto the menu of information panels. The secondary legislation defining the Construction Industry Scheme is contained in Regulations 1 to 60 and Schedules 1 & 2, ‘The Income Tax (Construction Industry Scheme) Regulations 2005’ (SI2005/2045). The primary legislation defining the Construction Industry Scheme is contained in FA04/S57 to S77, together with FA04/SCH11& 12. See CISR16000 onwards for more information on the primary legislation. This section summarises the provisions contained within the secondary legislation and deals with difficulties in interpretation that may arise. This section does not provide procedural detail so there are no action guides. Detailed information about procedures relating to particular provisions is provided in other areas of the CIS Guidance. These are identified in this section where appropriate. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17020
CISR17020 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 1 This regulation confirms the title of the regulations as the Income Tax (ConstructionIndustry Scheme) Regulations 2005. The regulations will come into force on an appointed day to be notified in the London,Edinburgh and Belfast Gazettes. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17030
CISR17030 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 2 This regulation defines the meaning of the following the Act approved method of electronic communications contract payment contractor construction contract construction operations electronic communications employer reference ICTA ITEPA notice PAYE Regulations Subcontractor tax month tax year tax period tax quarter TMA tribunal Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17040
CISR17040 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 3 This regulation sets out the arrangements under which a contractor can elect to operate separate schemes for each part of the business. This regulation corresponds with facilities provided under SI1993/744 reg 4. A contractor can elect to be treated as a different contractor in relation to different groups of subcontractors: SI2005/2045 reg 3(1). Where a contractor makes such an election, the regulations will have the effect of treating the contractor as a different contractor for each group of subcontractors, each group as constituting all the subcontractors paid by the contractor in respect of construction operations and where a subcontractor is allocated to more than one group, they will be treated as if they had more than one contractor for whom they receive payments relating to construction operations: SI2005/2045 reg 3(2). While a multiple contractor election continues, any new subcontractor must be allocated to at least one of the subcontractor groups: SI2005/2045 reg 3(3). HMRC must be notified of a multiple contractor election before the beginning of the tax month immediately preceding the tax month for which the election is to have effect. The contractor must also provide HMRC with confirmation of the tax month for which the election is to have effect, information identifying the different groups of subcontractors and confirming that no payments for construction operations are made outside of these groups: SI2005/2045 reg3(4) and (5). A multiple contractor election continues to have effect until the contractor notifies HMRC that it is to be revoked: SI2005/2045 reg 3(8). A revocation notice must be provided by the contractor before the beginning of the tax month for which the election is to be revoked. Revoking an election does not prevent the making of a new election for that or a later tax month: SI2005/2045 reg 3(9). An election that has not yet come into effect can be revoked at any time before the beginning of the tax month in which it was to take effect: SI2005/2045 reg 3(10). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (2) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17050
CISR17050 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 4 This regulation deals with the monthly return: to be read in conjunction with FA04/S70. The return should be made in a format approved by HMRC by 19t h of each month by any contractor making contract payments in that tax month and in the first tax month of the new scheme by any contractor who has made what would be a contract payment under the new scheme in the 12 months prior to commencement of the new scheme. SI2005/2045 reg 4(1). The contractor’s name, UTR and AO reference; the tax month covered by the return; the subcontractor’s name, NINO or CRN; and information as specified in sub-section (3) must be included on the return: SI2005/2045 reg 4(2). The following additional information to be included on the return if the subcontractor is registered for gross payment the UTR, and the total amount of contract payments made: SI2005/2045 reg 4(3)(a). if the subcontractor is registered for net payment the UTR the total amount of contract payments made the value of materials the total amount of deductions made: SI2005/2045 reg 4(3)(b). if the subcontractor is not registered for the scheme the UTR the total amount of contract payments made the value of materials the total amount of deductions made at the higher rate the verification reference for the higher rate deduction: SI2005/2045 reg 4(3)(c). The return may be submitted electronically: SI2005/2045 reg 4(4). The following declarations must be made by the contractor on the return none of the subcontractors listed are engaged under contracts of employment where necessary, subcontractors have been verified all required information has been entered on the return and that it is complete and accurate: SI2005/2045 reg 4(5). Where the return is not electronically submitted, it must be signed by the contractor or a person duly authorised by them: SI2005/2045 reg 4(6). The contractor must keep records to support the return: SI2005/2045 reg 4(7). The contractor must provide net registered subcontractors with a written receipt or notification showing the contractor’s name and employer reference the tax month to which the payment relates or date of payment subcontractor’s name and UTR total amount of contract payments made during the tax month total value of materials total of deductions made from payments where the subcontractor is not registered for the scheme, the verification reference: SI2005/2045 reg 4(8). The contractor can provide the receipt electronically if the subcontractor agrees and the information is capable of being stored and also printed in paper form if required: SI2005/2045 reg 4(9). Where a contractor has made no contract payments during the tax month, they must submit a Nil return (SI2005/2045 reg 4(10)), unless they have applied for a period of inactivity (SI2005/2045 reg 4(11)). If the contractor notifies HMRC that they do not intend to make any contract payments in the next 6 months they can claim a period of inactivity. SI2005/2045 reg 4(11). TMA70/S98A penalties will apply to the requirements set out at sub-sections (1), (3b), (3c) and (10), subject to sub-section (13): SI2005/2045 reg 4(12). TMA70/S98A penalties arise for each month or part of a month during which a failure to make a return continues after the 19th day of the sixth month following the appointed day: SI2005/2045 reg 4(13).ENABLING PROVISION - FA04/S70 (1) & (2) (Note; CIS penalties under TMA70/S98A have effect only for returns with a filing date of 19th October 2011 and earlier. From the filing date of 19th November 2011 and later the legislation under which CIS penalties are issued became FA09/SCH55, this change became effective by SI2011/2391). Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17060
CISR17060 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 5 This regulation deals with the appointment of representatives. A contractor company within a group can appoint another company within the same group todeal with its administrative obligations under the rules of the scheme: SI2005/2045 reg5(1). An appointment under (1) cannot take effect until the appointing company has advised HMRCof the arrangement: SI2005/2045 reg 5(2). The company appointed to carry out the administrative services must submit returns andpayments in the name of the appointing company: SI2005/2045 reg 5(3). The appointing company retains its responsibility to comply with the scheme, even thoughit has appointed another company within the group to carry out administrative services onits behalf: SI2005/2045 reg 5(4). For the purposes of this regulation, ICTA88/S413 (3) should be used to determine whethertwo companies are within the same group: SI2005/2045 reg 5(5). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S70 (4) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17070
CISR17070 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 6 This regulation deals with the verification process: to be read in conjunction withFA04/S69. When a contractor intends to make a payment they must contact HMRC to verify whether asubcontractor, or their nominee, is registered for the scheme and how they should be paid:SI2005/2045 reg 6(1). When verifying, SI2005/2045 reg 6(2) requires that a contractor must provide their name, UTR, AO and Employers Reference, and in respect of the subcontractor and any nominee the name, UTR and NINO (if an individual) the name of the partner and the firm, UTR of the firm, UTR or NINO of the partner if an individual, UTR or CRN if partner is a company (for partnerships) the name of the company, UTR and CRN (for companies) A contractor must not verify a subcontractor unless a contract has been awarded to thesubcontractor or a tender for work has been accepted: SI2005/2045 reg 6(3). A contractor does not need to verify in the following circumstances the subcontractor receiving the payment has been included on a return made by the contractor in the current or two previous tax years: SI2005/2045 reg 6(4)(a). the payment is made within two years of the appointed day and the subcontractor receiving the payment has been included on either a monthly return, or form CIS36, made by the contractor in the current or two previous tax years: SI2005/2045 reg 6(4)(b). if the contractor is a company, the subcontractor receiving the payment has been included on either a monthly return, or form CIS36, made by a company within the same group in the current or two previous tax years: SI2005/2045 reg 6(4)(c). where a contractor has made a multiple contractor election under SI2005/2045 reg 3 and has included the subcontractor receiving the payment on a monthly return within the current or two previous tax years in their capacity as a different contractor: SI2005/2045 reg 6(4)(d). the subcontractor receiving the payment has been included in either a monthly return or form CIS36 in the current or two previous tax years under a contract held by a business which has been acquired by the contractor, and where the transfer of the business has been notified to HMRC: SI2005/2045 reg 6(4)(e). For the purposes of Reg 4(c), ICTA88/S413 (3)(a) defines whether two companies arewithin the same group: SI2005/2045 reg 6(5). Provided the contractor has verified the subcontractor or reported a payment to HMRC oneither a monthly return or form CIS36 in the current or two previous tax years, HMRC mustnotify them if the subcontractor loses the right to gross payment and is transferred tonet payment status (SI2005/2045 reg 6(6)(a)); is moved from net to gross payment status(SI2005/2045 reg 6(6)(b)); or is de-registered from the scheme completely. (SI2005/2045reg 6(6)(a) and (b)) The contractor is entitled to assume that any person verified or notified as beingregistered for gross or net payment has not ceased to be so registered: SI2005/2045 reg6(7). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S69 Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17080
CISR17080 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 7 This regulation sets out how payment of sums deducted should be dealt with: to be readin conjunction with FA04/S61. A contractor must pay over to HMRC amounts deducted from payments made to subcontractorson net payment status within 17 days after the end of the tax period for electronic payments: SI2005/2045 reg 7(1)(a), and within 14 days after the end of the tax period in all other circumstances: SI2005/2045 reg 7(1)(b). If requested, HMRC must give the contractor a receipt for CIS deductions paid over tothe department under (1): SI2005/2045 reg 7(2). If the payment made under (1) is a joint payment (including CIS deductions, PAYE tax andNICs) and a receipt has already been provided for the total amount submitted, then HMRCdoes not have to provide a separate receipt in respect of the CIS elements of the totalpayment made: SI2005/2045 reg 7(3). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17090
CISR17090 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 8 This regulation allows the option of quarterly tax periods where the contractor has reason to believe that their average monthly amount of PAYE and CIS deductions will be less than £1500, and they choose to pay this over on a quarterly basis: SI2005/2045 reg 8(1)(a) and (b). The definition of ‘The average monthly amount’ is at SI2005/2045 reg 8(2)., and theexplanation of the calculating formula to be used is at SI2005/2045 reg 8(3). Sub-section (4) of this regulation defines certain abbreviations and phrases used insub-section (3). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17100
CISR17100 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 9 This regulation sets out HMRC’s powers, where conditions A or B are met, to recover deductions from the subcontractor where insufficient deductions have been made by the contractor: to be read in conjunction with FA04/S61. Definitions are provided at SI2005/2045 reg 9(2). of ‘the deductible amount’; ‘the amount actually deducted’; and ‘the excess’. Condition A requires that the contractor must satisfy HMRC that all reasonable steps were taken to comply with the legislation and that any failure to deduct the correct amount came about as a result of an error made in good faith or a belief that the legislation did not apply to the payment: SI2005/2045 reg 9(3)(a) and (b). Condition B requires that HMRC must be satisfied that the subcontractor receiving the payment under FA04/S61 was not chargeable to income or corporation tax in respect of those payments or that they have returned the payment on either a personal or company tax return and paid over any monies due: SI2005/2045 reg 9(4)(a) (i) and (ii). and the contractor asks HMRC to make a direction under (5): SI2005/2045 reg 9(4)(b). HMRC can make a direction that the contractor does not have to pay the excess payment due: SI2005/2045 reg 9(5). If condition A at SI2005/2045 reg 9(3) is not met, HMRC can refuse to make a direction under SI2005/2045 reg 9(5) but they must give notice to the contractor showing the grounds for the refusal and the date of issue of the refusal notice: SI2005/2045 reg 9(6)(a) and (b). SI2005/2045 reg 9(7). allows the contractor to appeal against a refusal notice. In making an appeal the contractor must notify HMRC of the grounds for appeal within 30 days of the refusal notice. The contractor’s grounds for appeal must be that the contractor met the conditions in (3): SI2005/2045 reg 9(8). If the tribunal determines that a refusal notice should not have been issued they can direct HMRC to make a determination under SI2005/2045 reg 9(5): SI2005/2045 reg 9(9). If a contractor makes a deduction from a subcontractor payment but does not pay the sum over to HMRC, it will be treated as having been paid when calculating the subcontractor’s liability: SI2005/2045 reg 9(10). ENABLING PROVISION - FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17110
CISR17110 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 10 This regulation sets out the return and certificate procedures where, 17 days or more after the end of the tax period, (A) deductions are not paid over by the contractor as required and HMRC are unaware of what amount is due or (B) amounts paid over by the contractor are regarded by HMRC as insufficient, or (C) the contractor has made a return under Regulation 4 showing the amount that they are due to pay under Regulation 7, but the contractor has not paid the full amount shown in the return. SI2005/2045 reg 10(1) to (3)and SI2007/672 reg 3. If either conditions (A) or (B) above are met, HMRC can issue the contractor with a notice requiring them to make a return of the amounts due in the tax period within 14 days of the issue of the notice, SI2005/2045 reg 10(4). Where the notice covers consecutive tax periods within a tax year, or condition (C) above is met, the notice will treat them as a single tax period: SI2005/2045 reg 10(5). On receiving the return HMRC may prepare a certificate showing the amount due for the tax period and, how much of that amount remains outstanding: SI2005/2045 reg 10(6).SI2005/2045 reg 57 details how certificates can be used as evidence that sums are due and unpaid. ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17120
CISR17120 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 11 This regulation deals with the notice and certificate procedures where, 17 days or moreafter the end of a tax period, either of the following conditions apply: (A) thecontractor has not paid any amount during the tax period and HMRC believes an amount isdue for that tax period; (B) the contractor has paid an amount of deductions over duringthe period but HMRC is not satisfied, after seeking the contractor’s explanation,that it is the full amount: SI2005/2045 reg 11(1), (2) and (3). If either of the conditions are met, HMRC can look at the contractor’s previouspayment record and specify, to their best judgement, an amount which they consider is dueand payable and may serve a notice on the contractor requiring that amount to be paidwithin 7 days of the issue of the notice: SI2005/2045 reg 11(4). If condition (A) is met in respect of two or more consecutive tax periods in a tax year,HMRC can give notice under (4) as if the consecutive periods were the latest tax periodspecified in the notice: SI2005/2045 reg 11(5). If, during the notice period, the contractor claims that they have paid over the fullamount of deductions but HMRC are not satisfied, the contractor can ask HMRC to inspectthe contractor’s records as if they had been required to produce them underSI2005/2045 reg 51: SI2005/2045 reg 11(6). Where HMRC does inspect the records in accordance with SI2005/2045 reg 11(6) andSI2005/2045 reg 51, any notice issued by HMRC under SI2005/2045 reg 11(4) is to bedisregarded: SI2005/2045 reg 11(7). Any amounts unpaid at the end of the period of the notice made at SI2005/2045 reg 11(4)are treated as though they were due in accordance with SI2005/2045 reg 7 and HMRC canprepare a certificate showing amounts unpaid: SI2005/2045 reg 11(8). If, during the notice period, the contractor settles all outstanding amounts or satisfiesHMRC that no monies are due, then SI2005/2045 reg 11(8) does not apply: SI2005/2045 reg11(9). If the contractor settles the amount certified by HMRC and it transpires that the amountdue was a lesser amount, the contractor is entitled to offset any excess monies againstsums due for a later tax period in the tax year: SI2005/2045 reg 11(10) and (11). Sub-section (12) refers to SI2005/2045 reg 57 which deals with the use of certificates asevidence of sums due and payable. ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17130
CISR17130 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 12 This regulation deals with the inspection of records as provided for under Regulation51. After reference to the contractor’s documents and records, HMRC can prepare acertificate showing the amount payable by the contractor for the tax year/tax periodcovered by the inspection and the amount remaining unpaid: SI2005/2045 reg 12(2)(a) and(b). Sub-section (3) refers to the provisions at SI2005/2045 reg 57 regarding the use ofcertificates as evidence of sums due. ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17140
CISR17140 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 13 This regulation deals with disputes surrounding amounts due and payable. The regulation applies where the contractor and subcontractor disagree on whether the payment falls within the scope of the scheme: SI2005/2045 reg 13(1)(a)(i). the contractor and subcontractor disagree about the amount to be deducted in accordance with FA04/S61: SI2005/2045 reg 13(1)(a)(ii). HMRC has made an inspection under Regulation 51 and believes that there may be amounts due to be paid over by the contractor: SI2005/2045 reg 13(1)(b). HMRC consider that it is necessary to apply the regulation: SI2005/2045 reg 13(1)(c). The regulation allows HMRC to use their best judgement in calculating the amount due from the contractor and to serve a notice of this determination: SI2005/2045 reg 13(2). If HMRC have issued a notice under SI2005/2045 reg 9(5) absolving a contractor from liability on any excess payments found to be due, amounts included in that notice cannot be taken into account on determinations made under this regulation, and vice versa: SI2005/2045 reg 13(3). A determination under this regulation can cover amounts due for one or more tax periods in a tax year and include a class or classes of subcontractors or one or more named individuals: SI2005/2045 reg 13(4). In accordance with Parts 4, 5 and 6 of TMA, any determination made under this regulation should be treated as if it were an assessment and as if the amount determined was income tax charged on the contractor. Parts 4, 5 and 6 apply with any necessary modification except that the amount determined is due and payable 14 days after the determination is made: SI2005/2045 reg 13(5). If disputes over amounts due arise under SI2005/2045 reg 13(1)(a) and HMRC makes no determination under SI2005/2045 reg 13(2), the contractor or subcontractor can ask the Tribunal to consider the matter: SI2005/2045 reg 13(6). If the circumstances described in SI2005/2045 reg 13(1)(a) apply the contractor is obliged to make the required deduction from the disputed contract payment and must pay this amount over to HMRC and when the final determination of the dispute is made, any excess amounts paid over by the contractor will be treated, except where SI2005/2045 reg 56 applies, as an overpayment of income or corporation tax by the subcontractor: SI2005/2045 reg 13(8)(a) and (b). ENABLING PROVISION - FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17150
CISR17150 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 14 This regulation deals with interest payments on overdue amounts. This regulation should be applied if the contractor has not paid over to HMRC the total amount due in respect of the tax year by the reckonable date: SI2005/2045 reg 14(1). Any amounts still outstanding from the contractor at the reckonable date will be subject to interest at the prescribed rate: SI2005/2045 reg 14(2). Para (2) applies even if the reckonable date falls on a non-business day: SI2005/2045 reg 14(3). Para (2) does not apply where HMRC have issued a direction under SI2005/2045 reg 9(5): SI2005/2045 reg 14(4). If the prescribed rate of interest changes, the new rate should be applied to any amounts still outstanding from the date of the change: SI2005/2045 reg 14(5). The ‘prescribed rate’ is defined at SI2005/2045 reg 14(6). The ‘reckonable date’ is 17 days after the end of the tax year, if payment is made electronically, or 14 days after the end of the tax year in any other case: SI2005/2045 reg 14(7). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17160
CISR17160 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 15 This regulation deals with interest due on amounts overpaid by the contractor. The regulation should be applied to amounts repaid to a contractor after the end of thetax year in which the payment was made: SI2005/2045 reg 15(1). Interest should be calculated at the prescribed rate and applied to amount repaid from therelevant time until the order for repayment is made: SI2005/2045 reg 15(2). The ‘relevant time’ is defined at SI2005/2045 reg 15(3). Any changes in the prescribed rate should be applied to the amount to be repaid from thedate of the change: SI2005/2045 reg 15(4). The ‘prescribed rate’ is defined at SI2005/2045 reg 15(5). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17170
CISR17170 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 16 This regulation applies to any amounts or interest due from the contractor under 10(6), 11(8), 12(2)(b) or 13(2), SI2005/2045 reg 10(6), 11(8), 12(2)(b) or 13(2). SI2005/2045 reg 16(1). Any unpaid amounts should be dealt with in accordance with Part 6 TMA as though they were income tax charged on the contractor, subject to modifications at (3): SI2005/2045 reg 16(2). For England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the timescale for proceedings to recover outstanding amounts is set out in Table 1 of SI2005/2045 reg 16(3). Proceedings can be brought against a contractor for the total amount outstanding, without the need to specify amounts due in respect of individual subcontractors or identifying the subcontractors involved: SI2005/2045 reg 16(4) For the purposes of TMA70/S65, 66, 67 the unpaid amount represents a single cause of action or complaint: SI2005/2045 reg 16(5). Paras (4) and (5) do not prevent separate proceedings being brought against a contractor for each of the amounts due for any tax period in respect of individual subcontractors: SI2005/2045 reg 16(6). ENABLING PROVISION - FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17180
CISR17180 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 17 This regulation deals with in-year repayments. The regulation applies where - the subcontractor is a sole trader or a firm an application has been made to HMRC by the sole trader or partner in accordance with (4) all income tax and Class 4 NICs have been paid by the sole trader or partner on their share of the profits or gains from the trade, profession or vocation of the subcontractor for any earlier year all payment vouchers have been submitted to HMRC that were received by the subcontractor under Regulation 7 IT(Subs in the CI) Regs 1993 in respect of payments made before the introduction of the new scheme: SI2005/2045 reg 17(1) (a) to (d). If HMRC are satisfied that a repayment is due, the subcontractor, subject to (5), is entitled to receive repayment of any excess: SI2005/2045 reg 17(2). The calculation of the in-year excess is given at SI2005/2045 reg 17(3). A declaration must be made to HMRC that all information provided in relation to (3) is complete and correct. Where the subcontractor is a sole trader the declaration should be signed by the individual; for firms, all individuals who are partners must sign the declaration; and where the partner is a company, the declaration should be signed by the company secretary or a director: SI2005/2045 reg 17(4). This regulation cannot be applied to repayments made after the end of the year to which the application relates: SI2005/2045 reg 17(5). ENABLING PROVISION - FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17190
CISR17190 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 18 This regulation deals with small payments. A payment under a construction contract is not a contract payment if the conditions setout in (2) and (3) are met: SI2005/2045 reg 18(1). The person making the payment falls within FA04/S59 (1) (b) to (l) and the person has beenapproved by HMRC for the purposes of this regulation: SI2005/2045 reg 18(2). That, excluding the cost of materials, the total payment made under the constructioncontract does not exceed £1,000: SI2005/2045 reg 18(3). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S60 (7) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17200
CISR17200 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 19 This regulation covers work done by a person on their own land. The payment is not a contract payment if the conditions set out in (2) and (3) are met:SI2005/2045 reg 19(1). The person making the payment must fall within FA04:s59 (1)(a) and must have been approvedby HMRC: SI2005/2045 reg 19(2). The payment must be made to – the owner of the property or the tenant of agricultural land on which the construction operation is carried out: SI2005/2045 reg 19(3)(a)(i) and (ii), and total payments made, excluding the direct cost of materials, must not exceed £1,000: SI2005/2045 reg 19(3)(b). A definition of ‘agricultural property’ can be found at SI2005/2045 reg 19(4). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S60 (7) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17210
CISR17210 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 20 This regulation deals with reverse premiums. Subject to para (2) a payment under a construction contract is not a contract payment if the payment is a reverse premium within the meaning of FA99/SCH6 or ITTOIA05/S99:SI2005/2045 reg 20(1). Para 5 of FA99/SCH6 does not apply for the purposes of (1): SI2005/2045 reg 20(2). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S60 (7) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17215
CISR17215 - The Scheme: Secondary legislation: Regulation 20A Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17220
CISR17220 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 21 This regulation deals with payments by schools with delegated budgets. A payment under a construction contract is not a contract payment if the payment is madeby the governing body or head teacher of a maintained school as the agent of a localeducation authority under S49(5)(b) of the Schools Standards and Framework Act 1998. ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S60 (7) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17230
CISR17230 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 22 This regulation deals with the arrangements for businesses involved in construction projects for their own use - known informally as ‘own-build’. A payment under a construction contract is not a contract payment if it is made by a person covered by FA04/S59 (1)(l) in respect of premises to be used for the purposes of the business of the person making the payment: SI2005/2045 reg 22(1)(a). another company within the same group, or another company in which the business holds at least 50% of the shares: SI2005/2045 reg 22(1)(b). For the purposes of (1) - own-build provisions cannot be applied where the property involved in the construction operation is for sale or let, except where the sale or letting of that property is purely incidental to the business of that person, or is held as an investment: SI2005/2045 reg 22(2)(a). in determining whether a property is used for the purposes of a business, incidental use of that property by others can be disregarded,: SI2005/2045 reg 22(2)(b). ICTA88/S413 (3)(a) determines whether two companies are within the same group: SI2005/2045 reg 22(2)(c). ENABLING PROVISION - FA04/S60 (7) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17235
CISR17235 - The scheme: scope of incidental: appendix to Regulation 22 Regulation 22 (1) of The Income Tax (Construction Industry Scheme) Regulations 2005 (S.I.2005/2045) provides that where deemed contractors make a payment under a construction contract, for construction work undertaken on a property they use for the purposes of their business, then that payment will not fall within the provisions of the Construction Industry Scheme. However, Regulation 22(2) provides that a property is not being used for the purposes of a persons business if it is for sale, or to let, or is held as an investment by that person. It also states that in determining if a property is used for the purposes of the business, any incidental use of the property by any other person can be disregarded. This appendix provides examples whereby, if construction work was undertaken, it would be excluded from the Construction Industry Scheme by virtue of Regulation 22(1), or included within the scheme by virtue of Regulation 22(2). Further guidance can also be obtained at https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr15140 Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17240
CISR17240 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 23 This regulation sets out the arrangements for private finance transactions. A payment under a construction contract is not a contract payment if – the person making the payment falls within FA04/S59 (1) (b) to (k): SI2005/2045 reg 23(1)(a), and the payment is made under a private finance transaction: SI2005/2045 reg 23(1)(b). A definition of a private finance transaction is given at SI2005/2045 reg 23(2). In connection with (2), a definition of ‘resources’ is provided at SI2005/2045 reg 23(3). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S60 (7) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17250
CISR17250 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 24 This regulation exempts any body of persons or trust established for charitablepurposes only from operating the scheme. ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S60 (7) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17260
CISR17260 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 25 This regulation deals with the registration provisions for gross or net payment status and registration cancellation for those on net payment status: to be read in conjunction with FA04/S63. When applying to be registered for the scheme, either for gross payment or under deduction, subcontractors must provide sufficient information and evidence to satisfy HMRC as to their identity. This may include - a birth certificate: SI2005/2045 reg 25(1)(a). name, address, NINO and UTR of: individual (if a sole trader); all partners (if a partnership); all directors or beneficial shareholders (if a company): SI2005/2045 reg 25(1)(b)(i) to (iii). utility bills: SI2005/2045 reg 25(1)(c). council tax bills: SI2005/2045 reg 25(1)(d). a passport: SI2005/2045 reg 25(1)(e). a driving licence: SI2005/2045 reg 25(1)(f). company registration number: SI2005/2045 reg 25(1)(g). company’s memorandum and articles of association: SI2005/2045 reg 25(1)(h). HMRC may require the applicant to present any of the above in person: SI2005/2045 reg 25(2). If HMRC are not satisfied by the evidence presented to confirm identity, they may refuse to register the applicant for net payment status but must provide a notice advising the reasons for refusal: SI2005/2045 reg 25(3). If HMRC suspect, at any time, that a person has in respect of (1) provided false or incorrect information : SI2005/2045 reg 25(4)(a). under any provision of FA04: Chapter 3 or the regulations, provided a fraudulent or incorrect return or provided incorrect information, whether as a contractor or subcontractor: SI2005/2045 reg 25(4)(b). knowingly, as a contractor or subcontractor, failed to comply with the provisions of the scheme: SI2005/2045 reg 25(4)(c). they may issue a notice immediately withdrawing registration for payment under deduction, giving the reasons for the cancellation: SI2005/2045 reg 25(4). A person can appeal against a withdrawal or refusal notice by giving notice to HMRC. The time limits and grounds for appeal are set out in Table 2 of SI2005/2045 reg 25(5). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S63 (1) & S68 Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17270
CISR17270 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 26 This regulation deals with the cancellation of registration for those on gross paymentstatus: to be read in conjunction with FA04/S66. For the purposes of FA04/S66 (2), cancellation of gross payment status after a prescribedperiod, the prescribed period will be 90 days from the date of the notice provided under(5). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S66 (9) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17280
CISR17280 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 27 This regulation sets out the evidence needed to satisfy the business test: to be readin conjunction with FA04/S64 and FA04/SCH11. The applicant must satisfy HMRC that they are carrying on a business in the United Kingdomwhich meets the requirements of FA04/SCH11/PARA2(a) & (b), evidence is required asfollows – the business address: SI2005/2045 reg 27(2)(a). invoices, contracts or purchase orders for construction work carried out by the applicant: SI2005/2045 reg 27(2)(b). details of payments for construction work: SI2005/2045 reg 27(2)(c). the books and accounts of the business: SI2005/2045 reg 27(2)(d). details of the business bank account, including bank statements: SI2005/2045 reg 27(2)(e). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/SCH11/PARA2 Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17290
CISR17290 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 28 This regulation deals with the minimum amounts required to satisfy the turnover test:to be read in conjunction with FA04/SCH11. For the purposes of FA04/SCH11/PARA3(1), the minimum turnover is £30,000: SI2005/2045 reg 28(1). For the purposes of FA04/SCH11/PARA7, the amount specified is £200,000: SI2005/2045 reg 28(2). For the purposes of FA04/SCH11/PARA11, the amount specified is £200,000: SI2005/2045 reg 28(3). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/SCH11, paras 3(1), 7(1) & 11(2) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17300
CISR17300 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 29 This regulation deals with the evidence required to satisfy the turnover test. To beread in conjunction with FA04/S66 and FA04/SCH11. For the qualifying period, applicants must produce – evidence of turnover of the business as described in FA04/SCH11/PARA3(1), 7(1) and 11(1): SI2005/2045 reg 29(1)(a). evidence of relevant payments, including bank statements and paid cheques: SI2005/2045 reg 29(1)(b). evidence that aggregate amounts of relevant payments at least equalled the turnover threshold: SI2005/2045 reg 29(1)(c)(i). for the purposes of FA04/S66, evidence that the aggregate amount of relevant payments at least equalled the turnover threshold or the average amount of relevant payments received during the qualifying period and the previous two years at least equalled the turnover threshold: SI2005/2045 reg 29(1)(c)(ii). documentary evidence that the business carried out construction operations: SI2005/2045 reg 29(1)(d). For new businesses conducted by a partnership or company and where there is no evidenceto support either turnover or the carrying on of construction operations, the followingwill be required to cover the qualifying period: evidence of relevant payments, including bank statements and paid cheques: SI2005/2045 reg 29(2)(a). for partnerships, evidence of the turnover of the partners: SI2005/2045 reg 29(2)(b). for companies, evidence of turnover of relevant persons: SI2005/2045 reg 29(2)(c). evidence of construction contracts entered into by the partnership or company, to include payment schedules with an aggregate value exceeding £200,000 and evidence that at least £30,000 of that amount has been received: SI2005/2045 reg 29(2)(d). where the business has been acquired from another person, the evidence specified at (3): SI2005/2045 reg 29(2)(e). Subject to para (4), the evidence required in the event of a transferred business is the transferor’s relevant turnover during the qualifying period: SI2005/2045 reg 29(3)(a). evidence that the transferor received an aggregate amount during the qualifying period at least equalling the turnover threshold: SI2005/2045 reg 29(3)(b)(i). for the purposes of FA04/S66, evidence that the aggregate amount of payments received by the transferor during the qualifying period at least equalled the turnover threshold or the average amount of payments received during the qualifying period and the previous two years at least equalled the turnover threshold: SI2005/2045 reg 29(3)(b)(ii). evidence, by way of invoices, to show the transferor carried out construction operations: SI2005/2045 reg 29(3)(c). evidence that the transferor would have satisfied the compliance test set out FA04/SCH11/PARA4, 8 or 12 at the date of transfer: SI2005/2045 reg 29(3)(d). The evidence required for para (2) can only be provided in respect of one applicationfor gross payment status: SI2005/2045 reg 29(5). The definition of ‘relevant payment’ and ‘relevant turnover’ is set out at SI2005/2045 reg29(5). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/SCH11/PARA3(10), 7(10) & 11(1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17310
CISR17310 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 30 This regulation deals with the number of partners or relevant persons to be taken intoaccount when considering the tests for gross payment status: to be read in conjunctionwith FA04/SCH11. For the purposes of FA04/SCH11/PARA7(2)(a) and 11(2)(a), where there has been afluctuation in the number of partners or relevant persons during the qualifying period,the number to be taken into account will be the maximum number of partners or relevantpersons at any one time during the qualifying period. ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/SCH11/PARA7(3) & 11(4) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17320
CISR17320 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 31 The regulation deals with circumstances where the turnover test may be treated ashaving been satisfied: to be read in conjunction with FA04/SCH11. If a sole trader, partnership or company cannot satisfy the conditions atFA04/SCH11/PARA3(1), 7(1) and 11(1) they can be treated as having met the turnover testwhere HMRC is satisfied that – the business does not mainly consist of construction operations: SI2005/2045 reg 31(a). in the year prior to the application the total turnover of the business exceeded the relevant turnover threshold: SI2005/2045 reg 31(b). in the year following the application the business is likely to receive relevant payments for construction operations which are incidental to the main activities of the business: SI2005/2045 reg 31(c). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/SCH11/PARA3(3), 7(3) & 11(4) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17330
CISR17330 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 32 The regulation deals with the exceptions to the compliance test; to be read inconjunction with FA04/SCH11. In certain circumstances, HMRC may treat a person as meeting the compliance test. Theprescribed obligations and prescribed circumstances in which failures of compliance willbe ignored are at Table 3 of this regulation. ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/SCH11/PARA4(3), 8(2) & 12(2) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17340
CISR17340 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 33 This regulation deals with the evidence required from those abroad during thequalifying period regarding their level of tax compliance; to be read in conjunction withFA04/SCH11. Applicants who claim to have been living outside of the UK and therefore not subject tothe provisions laid down at FA04/SCH11/PARA4, must satisfy HMRC by providing the following- subject to (3), applicants who claim to have been either employed or self-employed outside the UK must produce evidence from the Revenue Department of the country concerned to show that they were living in that country during the relevant part of the qualifying period: SI2005/2045 reg 33(2). If an applicant claims to have been outside of the UK but not employed or self-employed or not subject to any tax liability they must produce evidence from a Government department from the country where they were living confirming that they were living there during the relevant part of the qualifying period: SI2005/2045 reg 33(3)(a) and (b). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/SCH11/PARA4(5) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17350
CISR17350 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 34 This regulation covers applicants who have been living abroad and their tax compliance;to be read in conjunction with FA04/SCH11. The applicant must satisfy HMRC that they have fully complied with comparable taxobligations to those set out at FA04/SCH11/PARA4 in any country in which they claim tohave lived during any part of the qualifying period: SI2005/2045 reg 34(1). The applicant must produce evidence or documentation from the Revenue Department of allcountries in which they claim to have lived during the qualifying period confirming thatthey have fully complied with their tax obligations: SI2005/2045 reg 34(2). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/SCH11/PARA4(5) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17360
CISR17360 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 35 This regulation deals with applicants who claim to have been unemployed; to be read inconjunction with FA04/SCH11. If an applicant claims, as a result of unemployment, not to have been subject to one ormore of the obligations at FA04/SCH11/PARA4(1), they must provide HMRC with the following- If the applicant has been living in the UK, evidence by way of a statement from thebenefits officer certifying the period during which they were registered as unemployed:SI2005/2045 reg 35(2)(a) or if the applicant was not registered as unemployed, any otherevidence which satisfies HMRC that they were unemployed: SI2005/2045 reg 35(2)(b). If the applicant claims to have been unemployed whilst living outside the United Kingdom,they must produce evidence from a Government department from within the other countryconfirming they were living there throughout the period : SI2005/2045 reg 35(3). A definition of ‘benefits officer’ is at SI2005/2045 reg 35(4). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/SCH11/PARA4(5) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17370
CISR17370 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 36 This regulation refers to circumstances where the applicant claims to have been in fulltime education; to be read in conjunction with FA04/SCH11. If an applicant claims, as a result of being in full time education, not to have beensubject to one or more of the obligations at FA04/SCH11/PARA4(1), they must provide HMRCwith the following - If the applicant has been living in the UK, they must supply a statement from the educational facility attended certifying the periods during which they undertook full time education: SI2005/2045 reg 36(2). If the applicant has been living outside the UK, they must supply a statement from the educational facility they attended, in the other country , certifying the periods during which they undertook full time education: SI2005/2045 reg 36(3). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/SCH11/PARA4(5) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17380
CISR17380 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 37 This regulation defines the meaning of ‘applicant’ and ‘qualifying period’. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17390
CISR17390 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 38 This regulation provides a definition of ‘official computer system’ and ‘specifiedpayment’. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17400
CISR17400 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 39 This regulation provides that information submitted by an approved method of electroniccommunication is only considered to have been delivered if it is accepted by an HMRCsystem. ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17410
CISR17410 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 40 This regulation deals with the proof of content of electronic delivery. HMRC may certify that a printed version of information received by an approved method ofelectronic communication is evidence, unless proved otherwise, that the information – was delivered by an approved method of electronic communication: SI2005/2045 reg 40(1)(a), and constitutes all that was delivered on that occasion: SI2005/2045 reg 40(1)(b). A certificate provided by HMRC in accordance with (1) can be presumed to be genuine,unless proved otherwise: SI2005/2045 reg 40(2). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17420
CISR17420 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 41 This regulation deals with the proof of identity of the person sending or receivingelectronic delivery. The identity of – a person sending information electronically to HMRC, or a person receiving information electronically from HMRC can be assumed to be, unless proved otherwise, the person recorded on the HMRC system. ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17430
CISR17430 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 42 This regulation deals with information provided electronically on behalf of someoneelse. If a person has information electronically delivered to an HMRC system by a third party,that information is regarded as having been delivered by the person themselves:SI2005/2045 reg 42(1)(a). If a person can prove that information was electronically delivered by a third party toHMRC without their knowledge or consent, then (1) will not apply: SI2005/2045 reg 42(2). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17440
CISR17440 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 43 This regulation deals with proof of delivery of information provided electronically. Unless proved otherwise, it can be assumed that information has been electronicallyprovided either to or by HMRC if the delivery and despatch details are recorded on an HMRCsystem: SI2005/2045 reg 43(1)(a) and (b) Unless proved otherwise, electronic delivery of information to or from HMRC cannot beassumed if there is no record of delivery or despatch details on an HMRC system:SI2005/2045 reg 43(2)(a) and (b). Unless proved otherwise, it can be assumed that the time of receipt or despatch ofelectronically delivered information will be as recorded on an HMRC system: SI2005/2045reg 43(3). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17450
CISR17450 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 44 This regulation deals with proof of payments made electronically. Unless proved otherwise, electronic payments from or to HMRC can be assumed to have beenmade if delivery and despatch details are recorded on an HMRC system: SI2005/2045 reg44(1)(a) and (b). Unless proved otherwise, electronic payments from or to HMRC cannot be assumed to havebeen made if delivery and despatch details are not recorded on an HMRC system: SI2005/2045reg 44(2)(a) and (b). Unless proved otherwise, it can be assumed that the time of receipt or despatch ofelectronically delivered payments will be as recorded on an HMRC system: SI2005/2045 reg44(3). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17460
CISR17460 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 45 This regulation deals with mandatory electronic payments. If a contractor has received an e-payment notice under Regulation 199 of the PAYERegulations in respect of a tax year they must make their CIS payment electronically:SI2005/2045 reg 45(1). (1) applies whether or not a payment of tax is due under Regulation 68 of the PAYERegulations: SI2005/2045 reg 45(2). If HMRC have given a direction under Regulation 199(3) of the PAYE Regulations, the CISpayment must be made accordingly: SI2005/2045 reg 45(3). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17470
CISR17470 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 46 This regulation deals with contractors required to make an electronic payment. If HMRC does not receive a specified payment, electronically or otherwise, by the required date the contractor is in default: SI2005/2045 reg 46(2). The contractor will not be in default if they had a reasonable excuse for not submitting the payment on time and the payment is received by HMRC as soon as possible after the reasonable excuse ceased: SI2005/2045 reg 46(3)(a) and (b). Inability to pay is not a reasonable excuse: SI2005/2045 reg 46(4). A payment is not treated as having been received by the required date until the total amount due is fully in HMRC’s possession: SI2005/2045 reg 46(5). ENABLING PROVISION - FA04/S71 (1) See CISR17700 this regulation was revoked with effect for tax periods where tax was chargeable commencing 6 April 2010. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17480
CISR17480 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 47 This regulation deals with notices that HMRC must provide to defaulting contractors. HMRC must issue a default notice to anyone appearing to be in default in accordance with Regulation 46: SI2005/2045 reg 47(1). Anyone served with a default notice can appeal by notifying HMRC within 30 days of the date of the notice. The grounds for appeal must be that the person is not in default. If the appeal is successful the default notice must be withdrawn: SI2005/2045 reg 47(2), (3) and (4). Regulation 59 applies to appeals under this para: SI2005/2045 reg 47(5). ENABLING PROVISION - FA04/S71 (1) See CISR17700 this regulation was revoked with effect from tax periods where tax was chargeable commencing 6 April 2010. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17490
CISR17490 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 48 This regulation deals with default surcharges. If a defaulting contractor has received a default notice (Regulation 47) and a surcharge notice (Regulation 49) they are liable to a surcharge: SI2005/2045 reg 48(1). The surcharge will be the sum of all surcharges made on defaulted payments during the tax year in which the payments were due: SI2005/2045 reg 48(2). The surcharge in respect of each default is the specified percentage of (A-B): SI2005/2045 reg 48(3). The formula to be used in calculating the specified percentage and surcharge can be found at SI2005/2045 reg 48(4). The definition of a ‘surcharge period’ is at Reg 48(5) A surcharge is payable 30 days after the issue of the surcharge notice: Reg 48(6), SI2005/2045 reg 48(6). TMA70/S102 applies to a surcharge payable under this para as if it were a penalty: SI2005/2045 reg 48(7). ENABLING PROVISION - FA04/S71 (1) See CISR17690 this regulation was revoked with effect from tax periods where tax was chargeable commencing 6 April 2010. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17500
CISR17500 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 49 This regulation deals with surcharge notices and appeals. If a contractor has been in default on three or more occasions during a surcharge period HMRC must issue them with a surcharge notice rendering them liable to a surcharge under Reg.48: SI2005/2045 reg 49(1). The surcharge notice must show the total surcharge payable for the tax year: SI2005/2045 reg 49(2). The surcharge notice must be issued within 6 years of the end of the tax year or, if earlier, the date on which the contractor delivered a Regulation 73 PAYE Regs return (forms P35 and P14): SI2005/2045 reg 49(3). The contractor can appeal against the surcharge notice by notifying HMRC within 30 days of the date of the notice. The grounds of appeal will be that the number of defaults shown in the notice is incorrect or that the amounts shown on the notice are incorrect: SI2005/2045 reg 49(4) and (5). Para 5(a) does not apply where a disputed default has already been the subject of a Regulation 49 appeal, following which the default notice was not withdrawn: SI2005/2045 reg 49(6). ENABLING PROVISION - FA04/S71 (1) See CISR17690 this regulation was revoked with effect from tax periods where tax was chargeable commencing 6 April 2010. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17510
CISR17510 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 50 This regulation covers powers delegated to HMRC officers. An officer of HMRC may undertake the following on behalf of the Board – register a subcontractor under FA04/S63: SI2005/2045 reg 50(1)(a). decide who needs to satisfy the qualifying conditions for gross payment status as set out in FA04/S64 (5): SI2005/2045 reg 50(1)(b). cancel registration for gross payment status as at FA04/S66: SI2005/2045 reg 50(1)(c). This regulation does not prejudice any other HMRC powers to delegate responsibility:SI2005/2045 reg 50(2). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S75 (3) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17520
CISR17520 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 51 This regulation deals with the inspection of records. When asked, a contractor must deliver for HMRC inspection either all of their records or those specifically requested by HMRC. This to be done at the prescribed place and within a reasonable timescale: SI2005/2045 reg 51(1). A definition of ‘contractor records’ is at SI2005/2045 reg 51(2)(a) and (b). When asked, a person who is or who has been a subcontractor within the preceding 3 years, must deliver for HMRC inspection either all of their records or those specifically requested by HMRC. This to be done at the prescribed place and within a reasonable timescale: SI2005/2045 reg 51(3). A definition of ‘subcontractor records’ is at SI2005/2045 reg 51(4)(a) and (b). A definition of ‘prescribed place’ is at SI2005/2045 reg 51(5)(a) and (b). HMRC may take copies or extracts of any document produced for inspection in accordance with (1) or (3) or can, if necessary, retain an original document for a reasonable amount of time: SI2005/2045 reg 51(6)(a) and (b). If HMRC does remove an original document in accordance with para (6)(b) they must provide a receipt. If the person providing the document needs it for the conduct of their business, they can ask HMRC to provide a copy of the document within 7 days of a request being made: SI2005/2045 reg 51(7)(a) and (b). If another has the right to hold the document in place of the payment of a debt, this right is not affected by the removal and retention of the document by HMRC: SI2005/2045 reg 51(8). If records are electronically held by the person required to produce them, HMRC must be given all necessary facilities to allow them to access the information: SI2005/2045 reg 51(9). Contractors and subcontractors must retain all records, which are not required to be sent to HMRC under these regulations, for a period of 3 years from the end of the tax year to which they relate: SI2005/2045 reg 51(10). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S70 (3) & 73(4) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17530
CISR17530 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 52 This regulation deals with additional provisions for the inspection of subcontractor records. Subcontractors on net payment status must maintain the records specified in (2) and must produce these as required by HMRC for inspection. This to be done at a prescribed place and within a reasonable timescale: SI2005/2045 reg 52(1)(a) and (b). The subcontractor must keep a record of the full amount of tax due to HMRC in the preceding 3 years, and a record of amounts deducted from payments made to them by contractors under FA04/S61: SI2005/2045 reg 52(2)(a) and (b). A definition of ‘prescribed place’ can be found at SI2005/2045 reg 52(3). HMRC may take copies or extracts from documents produced by the subcontractor for inspection in accordance with (1)(b) and, if necessary, may retain an original document for a reasonable period of time: SI2005/2045 reg 52(4)(a) and (b). If another person has the right to retain the document in place of the payment of a debt, this right is not affected by the retention of the document by HMRC: SI2005/2045 reg 52(5). If records are electronically held by the person required to produce them, HMRC must be given all necessary facilities to allow them to access the information: SI2005/2045 reg 52(6). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S73 (1) & (4) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17540
CISR17540 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 53 This regulation should be applied to close companies and private companies limited byshares who are, or are applying to be, registered for gross payment status. Where there is an issue or transfer of shares that effectively changes control of thecompany, within 30 days of the date of the change the company must notify HMRC of the nameand address of the person to whom the issue or transfer was made: SI2005/2045 reg 53(2). For the purposes of this regulation, ‘control’ has the same meaning as ICTA88/S840:SI2005/2045 reg 53(3). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S65 (2) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17550
CISR17550 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 54 The personal representatives of a deceased contractor must discharge allresponsibilities under these regulations. ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S73 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17560
CISR17560 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 55 Any notice required under these regulations can be sent by post. ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S731(1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17570
CISR17570 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 56 This regulation deals with the set-off arrangements for companies operating on net payment status: to be read in conjunction with FA04/S61 and 62(3). This regulation only applies to subcontractors with net payment status which are companies. Deductions held by HMRC in respect of companies with net payment status should be set-off in the following sequence: SI2005/2045 reg 56(2). to discharge any liability the subcontractor company has to primary Class 1 contributions in respect of earnings paid to employees during the year; to discharge any liability the subcontractor company has to secondary Class 1 contributions in respect of earnings paid to employees during the year; to discharge any liability the subcontractor company has to account for tax deducted from the emoluments of their employees under S684 ITEPA for the year; to discharge any liability the subcontractor company has to account for deductions made in that year from emoluments of their employees under S22(5), Teaching & Higher Education Act 1998, S73 (B) of the Education (Scotland) Act 1980; or Article 3(5) of the Education (Student Support)(Northern Ireland) Order 1998; to discharge any liability the subcontractor company has to refund HMRC in respect of payments made by them in respect of statutory sick pay, statutory maternity pay, statutory paternity pay or statutory adoption pay under the relevant recovery provision; and to discharge any liability the subcontractor company has to account for CIS deductions made by them from payments to subcontractors under FA04/S61. If, after all the above liabilities have been discharged, sums remain outstanding,these can be reimbursed to the subcontractor company, subject to (5) and (6),: SI2005/2045reg 56(3). Any monies repaid to the subcontractor company will be regarded as tax repaid for the purposes of Regulation 83 of the PAYE regulations (repayment supplement): SI2005/2045 reg56(4). Repayments in accordance with (4) cannot be made until the end of the tax year in which the deduction was made and the subcontractor company has delivered a return under Regulation 73 of the PAYE regulations: SI2005/2045 reg 56(5). If HMRC believes monies are due in respect of corporation tax for an accounting period ending before the relevant payment was made, they may retain an amount required to discharge this liability before any repayment can be considered: SI2005/2045 reg 56(6). the relevant recovery provision’ is defined at SI2005/2045 reg 56(7). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S62 (3) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17580
CISR17580 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 57 This regulation deals with certificates issued by HMRC. A certificate issued by HMRC, showing that sums due from the contractor have not beenpaid, is sufficient evidence that liabilities in a certificate under 10(6), 11(8) or 12(2)remain unpaid and due to the Crown: SI2005/2045 reg 57(1) and (2). A certificate issued by HMRC, showing any amount of interest payable by the contractorunder Regulation 14 has not been paid, is sufficient evidence that the liabilities remainunpaid and due to the Crown: SI2005/2045 reg 57(3). The production of the contractor’s return under Regulation 10(4) and an HMRCcertificate under Regulation 10(6) is sufficient evidence that the amount of tax shown inthe certificate is due and payable by the contractor for the tax period in question:SI2005/2045 reg 57(4). A certificate issued under para (1) or (3) remains a certificate until the contrary isproved: SI2005/2045 reg 57(5). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17590
CISR17590 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 58 This regulation deals with the rules for payments by cheque. For the purposes of the provisions listed in (2), cheque payments to HMRC, which arehonoured on first presentation to the bank, will be treated as having been made on the dayit was received by HMRC: SI2005/2045 reg 58(1). The provisions covered by (1) are Regulation 7, 9, 11 and 14: SI2005/2045 reg 58(2). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17600
CISR17600 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 59 This regulation gives supplementary information in regard to appeals. TMA70/S31A(5) and (6), 31B and 31D apply to appeals under regulation 47, as they apply toan appeal under TMA70/S31: SI2005/2045 reg 59(1). For appeals under regulation 47 or 49(4), the relevant place for the purposes of paragraph3(1)(a) of TMA70/SCH3 is the contractor’s place of business in the UK, or, if thereis no such place, the contractor’s place of residence in the UK: SI2005/2045 reg59(2). place of business’ and ‘place of residence’ are defined in SI2005/2045 reg 59(3). ENABLING PROVISION – FA04/S71 (1) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17610
CISR17610 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: regulation 60 This regulation gives effect to schedules 1 and 2 to the regulations. SCH 1 contains provisions that ensure continuity of the law from the old scheme to the new scheme. SCH 2 revokes a number of regulations that will no longer be needed. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17620
CISR17620 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: SI2006/3240 This Statutory Instrument gives effect to S77(1) FA04 and states that the ‘appointed day’ for the purposes of that section of the Act is 6t h April 2007. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17630
CISR17630 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: SI2007/46 This Statutory Instrument states that for the purposes of S61(1) FA04 (deductions on account of tax from contract payments) the relevant percentage is; 20% if the person for whose labour (or whose employees’ or officers’ labour) the payment in question is made is registered for payment under deduction, or 30% if the person is not so registered. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17640
CISR17640 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: SI2007/672 This Statutory Instrument amends Reg 10, Reg 19, Reg 20 and Reg 22 SI2005/2045 and the revised text for each is as follows; Regulation 10 (Return and certificate if amount may be unpaid) Paragraph 1 now reads; ‘This Regulation applies if, 17 days or more after the end of a tax period, condition ‘A, B or C’ is met’. A new paragraph 3A is inserted which states; ‘(3A) Condition C is that; the contractor has made a return under Regulation 4 showing the amount which the contractor is liable to pay under Regulation 7 for that tax period, but the contractor has not paid the full amount shown in the return;. Paragraph 4 now reads; ‘If condition A or B is met an officer of Revenue and Customs may give notice to the contractor requiring the contractor within 14 days of the issue of the notice to deliver a return showing the amount which the contractor is liable to pay under Regulation 7 in respect of the tax period’. Paragraph 5 now reads ‘If; the notice extends to, or condition C is met in two or more consecutive tax periods in a tax year, this regulation has effect as if they were one tax period’. Paragraph 6 now reads; ‘On receiving a return made by the contractor under paragraph (4) or if Condition C is met, an officer of Revenue and Customs may prepare a certificate showing the amount which the contractor is liable to pay for the tax period and how much (if any) of that amount remains unpaid’. Regulation 19 (work carried out on land owned by the person to whom payment is made). Paragraph 2(a) now reads; ‘the person is one to whom Section 59(1)(a) of the Act applies, and’ Regulation 20 (reverse premiums) Paragraph 1 now reads; ‘Subject to paragraph (2) a payment under a construction contract is not a contract payment if the payment is a reverse premium within the meaning of schedule 6 to the Finance Act 1999 (tax treatment of receipts by way of reverse premium) (see paragraph 1 of that Schedule) or section 99 of the Income Tax (Trading and Other Income) Act 2005 (reverse premiums)’. Paragraph 2 now reads; ‘Paragraph 5 of Schedule 6 to the Finance Act 1999 (exclusion of receipts taken into account for capital allowances) and section 100(1) of the Income Tax (Trading and Other Income) Act 2005 (excluded cases) do not apply for the purposes of paragraph (1)’. Regulation 22 (payments in respect of property used for business) Paragraph 2(a) now reads; ‘property is not used for the purposes of the business of a person if it is for sale or to let (except where the sale or letting of that property is purely incidental to the business of that person) or is held as an investment by that person’. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17650
CISR17650 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: SI2008/740 This Statutory Instrument amends Reg 2, Reg 11, Reg 16 and Reg 57 SI2005/2045 and the revised text for each is as follows; Regulation 2 (interpretation) This amendment inserts new definitions in the list as follows; ‘combined amount’ means an amount which includes an amount the contractor is liable to pay under these regulations and one or more of the following; earnings-related contributions due under the SSC Regulations; tax due under the PAYE Regulations; payments of repayments of student loans under the Student Loan Regulations; ‘SSC Regulations’ means the Social Security (Contributions) Regulations 2001 ‘Student Loan Regulations’ means the Education (Student Loans) (Repayment) Regulations 2000 or, in Northern Ireland, the Education (Student Loans) (Repayment) Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2000. Regulation 7 (payment, due date for payment of amounts deducted and receipts) Paragraph 3(b) now reads; ‘any tax deducted under the PAYE Regulations, and’ Regulation 8 (quarterly tax periods) Paragraph 4 now reads; ‘In this regulation; ‘employed earner’ has the same meaning as in the SSCBA; ‘SSCBA’ means the Social Security Contributions and Benefit Act 1992, or in Northern Ireland, the Social Security Contributions and Benefit (Northern Ireland) Act 1992; Regulation 11 (notice and certificate if amount may be unpaid) Paragraph 4 now reads; ‘An Officer of Revenue and Customs, on consideration of the contractor’s record of past payments whether of deductions under section 61 of the Act (deductions on account of tax from contract payments) or of combined amounts, may; specify, to the best of his judgment, the amount due under regulation 7 or a combined amount which he considers the contractor is liable to pay, and serve notice on the contractor requiring payment of the specified amount within 7 days of the issue of the notice (‘the notice period’) Paragraph 6(a) now reads; ‘claims that any payment made in respect of the tax period specified in the notice is or includes the full amount the contractor is liable to pay under regulation 7, but’ Paragraph 8(a) now reads; ‘the amount unpaid is treated as or including an amount which the contractor was liable to pay for that tax period under regulation 7, and’ Paragraph 10 now reads; ‘Paragraph 11 applies if the contractor pays an amount of deductions under section 61 of the Act, whether separately or as part of a combined amount certified under this regulation which exceeds the amount the contractor would have been liable to pay in respect of that tax period apart from this regulation’ Paragraph 11 now reads; ‘The contractor is entitled to set off the excess of deductions under section 61 of the Act against any amount which the contractor is liable to pay under regulation 7 for any subsequent tax periods in the tax year’. Regulation 16 (recovery of amounts unpaid and interest) Paragraph 2 now reads; ‘Part 6 of TMA (collection and recovery) applies to the recovery of the unpaid amount or combined amount and any interest on it as if it were income tax charged on the contractor but with the modification indicated in paragraph (3)’ Table 1 in Paragraph 3 now reads; Paragraph 4 now reads; ‘Proceedings against a contractor may be brought for the recovery of the unpaid amount, or unpaid combined amount and any interest on it, without distinguishing the amounts which the employer is liable to pay in respect of each subcontractor and without specifying the subcontractor in question’. Paragraph 5 now reads; ‘The unpaid amount, or unpaid combined amount and any interest on it, is one cause of action or one matter of complaint for the purposes of proceedings under Section 65, 66 and 67 of TMA (magistrates’ courts, county courts and inferior courts in Scotland)’ Regulation 57 (quarterly tax periods) After Paragraph 2, a new paragraph 2A is inserted with the following text; ‘An officer of Revenue and Customs may prepare a certificate showing the whole or part of a combined amount which includes deductions under section 61 of the Act without specifying the components of the combined amount. Paragraph (1) shall apply with any necessary modifications to the certificate’. Paragraph 3 now reads; ‘A certificate of an officer of Revenue and Customs that, to the best of his knowledge and belief, any amount of interest payable under regulation 14 (interest on amounts overdue) has not been paid by a contractor, is sufficient evidence that the amount mentioned in the certificate is unpaid and due to the Crown’. After Paragraph 3, a new paragraph 3A is inserted with the following text; ‘An officer of Revenue and Customs may prepare a certificate showing the total amount of interest payable in respect of the whole or any component of the combined amount without specifying which component of the combined amount the interest relates to. Paragraph (3) shall apply with any necessary modifications to the certificate’. Paragraph 5 now reads; ‘A document which purports to be a certificate under this regulation is treated as such a certificate until the contrary is proved’. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17660
CISR17660 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: SI2008/1282 This Statutory Instrument amends Reg 32 SI2005/2045 and the revised text is as follows; Table 3 is amended by the addition of the following; Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17670
CISR17670 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: SI2009/56 This Statutory Instrument amends FA04 and SI2005/2045 and the revised text(s) for the Construction Industry Scheme section of this act, and the statutory instrument are as follows; Finance Act 2004 Section 59 Section 59(4)(b) now reads; ‘Where only a part of the trade is transferred, the expenditure is apportioned in such a manner as appears to the Board of Inland Revenue, or on appeal to the tribunal, to be just and reasonable’. Section 67 Section 67(1) now reads; ‘A person aggrieved by- the refusal of an application for registration for gross payment, or the cancellation of his registration for gross payment, may by notice appeal’ Section 67(4) now reads; ‘The jurisdiction of the tribunal on such an appeal shall include jurisdiction to review any relevant decision taken by the Board of Inland Revenue in the exercise of their functions under section 63, 64, 65 or 66.’ Section 67(5) now reads; ‘Where a person appeals against the cancellation of his registration for gross payment by virtue of a determination under Section 66(1), the cancellation of his registration does not take effect until whichever is the latest of the following- the abandonment of the appeal the determination of the appeal by the tribunal, or the determination of the appeal by the Upper Tribunal or a court Section 67(6) is deleted completely Top of page SI2005/2045 Regulation 2 (interpretation) Omit the entry for ‘tax appeal Commissioners means the General Commissioners or Special Commissioners as the case may be’ Insert; ‘‘tribunal’ means the Fist Tier Tribunal or, where determined by or under Tribunal Procedure Rules, the Upper Tribunal’ Regulation 9 (Recovery from sub-contractor of amount not deducted by contractor) Paragraph 9 now reads; ‘If on an appeal under paragraph (7) that is notified to the tribunal it appears that the refusal notice should not have been issued the tribunal may direct that an officer of Revenue and Customs make a direction under paragraph (5) in an amount the tribunal determines is the excess for one or more tax periods falling within the relevant year’ Regulation 13 (Determination of amounts payable by contractor and appeal against determination) Paragraph 6 now reads; ‘If paragraph (1)(a) applies and an officer of Revenue and Customs does not make a determination under paragraph (2), either the contractor or the subcontractor may on giving notice to an officer of Revenue and Customs, apply to the tribunal to determine the matter’. Paragraph 7 is deleted completely Regulation 25 (Registration for gross payment or payment under deduction and cancellation of registration for payment under deduction) Paragraph 6 is deleted completely Regulation 59 (Appeals: supplementary provisions) Paragraph 1 now reads; ‘Section 31A(5) and (6) of TMA applies to appeals under regulation 47 (default notice and appeal) as it appeals to an appeal under section 31 of that act’. Paragraphs 2 and 3 are deleted completely Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17680
CISR17680 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: SI2009/1890 This Statutory Instrument amends FA04 and the revised text(s) for the Construction Industry Scheme section of this act, is as follows; Finance Act 2004 Schedule 11, Part 4, paragraph 14 Insert a new sub-paragraph that reads as follows; 14A(1) For any part of the qualifying period falling on 1 October 2009 or later, paragraph 12(5) must be understood as referring instead to— the Companies Act 2006 (c 46) sections 394, 395, 437 and 441 (accounts); sections 167(1), 167(2), 276(1) and 276(2) of that Act (changes in director or secretary); Part 24 of that Act (annual returns); regulations under Part 34 of that Act (overseas companies) which are about- registration of particulars, accounts, reports or returns, trading disclosures. (2) For such part of the qualifying period, paragraph 12(6) must be disregarded and paragraphs 12(7)(a) and 12(8) understood as referring to sub-paragraphs (1) to (5) instead of (1) to (6). Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17690
CISR17690 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: SI2010/466 This Statutory Instrument revokes Regulations 48 and 49 of the Income Tax (Construction Industry Scheme) Regulations with effect from tax periods where tax was chargeable beginning on 6 April 2010. Paragraph 4 (2) Regulations 48 (default surcharge) and 49 (surcharge notice and appeal) of the Income Tax (Construction Industry Scheme) Regulations 2005 are omitted subject to the savings set out in paragraph (3). (3) The regulations referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) shall continue to have effect in relation to surcharges arising in respect of late payments of tax where the tax was chargeable in respect of a tax period ending on or before 5 April 2010. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17700
CISR17700 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: SI2010/717 This Statutory Instrument amends Reg 13, Reg 38, Reg 45, Reg 46 and Reg 47 SI2005/2045 and the revised text for each is as shown below. These amended Regulations apply only in relation to the tax year 2010-11 and subsequent tax years except that the second amendment to Reg 45 paragraph 1 applies to the tax year 2011-12 and subsequent tax years; Regulation 13 (Determination of amounts payable by contractor and appeal against determination) Paragraph 5 now reads; A Determination under this regulation is subject to Parts 4, 5, 5A, and 6 of TMA (assessment, appeals, collection and recovery) as if (a) the determination were an assessment, and (b) the amount determined were income tax charged on the contractor and those Parts of that Act apply accordingly with any necessary modifications, except that the amount determined is due and payable 14 days after the determination is made. Regulation 38 (Electronic Communications - interpretation) The definition of ‘specified payment’ has been amended and now reads; ‘‘specified payment’ means the amount due under regulation 7 (payment, due date for payment of amounts deducted and receipts) in respect of contract payments’. Regulation 45 (Mandatory electronic payment) Paragraph 1 has now been substituted with the following; ‘(1) A contractor who is a large employer within the meaning of regulation 191 (large and medium sized employers) of the PAYE Regulations must pay the specified payment using an approved method of electronic communications.’ Paragraph 1 is amended and now reads as follows and shall apply only in relation to the tax year 2011-12 and subsequent tax years; ‘(1) A contractor who is a large employer within the meaning of regulation 198A (large employers) of the PAYE Regulations must pay the specified payment using an approved method of electronic communications.’ Insert a new paragraph 4 which reads as follows; ‘(4) A specified payment is not treated as received in full by Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs on or before the date by which that specified payment is required in accordance with regulation 7 unless it is made in a manner which secures (in a case where the specified payment is made otherwise than in cash) that, on or before that date, all transactions can be completed which need to be completed before the whole amount of the specified payment becomes available to the Commissioners for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs’. Regulation 46 (Contractor in default if specified payment not received by applicable due date) This regulation is deleted completely. Regulation 47 (Default notice and appeal) This regulation is deleted completely. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17710
CISR17710 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: SI2011/2391 This Statutory Instrument gives effect to FA10(No3)/s26(2) to 26(4), FA09/s104(3) to s104(5) and FA09/s106(2) to s106(5) and states that the ‘appointed day’ for the purposes of the sections of these Acts stated above, is 6th October 2011. Regulation 4 (Monthly Return) This Statutory Instrument also amends Reg 4(13) SI2005/2045 so that it now reads as follows; (13) A penalty under section 98A of TMA in relation to a failure to make a return in accordance with paragraphs (1) or (10) arises for each month (or part of a month) during which the failure continues after the 19th day of the sixth month following the appointed day, but only arises where that failure relates to a return that must be made not later than 19 October 2011. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17720
CISR17720 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: SI2012/820 This Statutory Instrument amends Reg 2, Reg 8, Reg 32, Reg 45 and Reg 56 SI2005/2045 and the revised text for each is as shown below. These amended Regulations apply only from 6 April 2012, and should be read in conjunction with the Income Tax (Pay As You Earn) (Amendment) Regulations 2012 (SI2012/822) which allows for the introduction of Real Time Information (RTI); Regulation 2 (Interpretation) The definition of ‘student loan regulations’ has been amended and now reads; “Student Loan Regulations” means the Education (Student Loans) (Repayment) Regulations 2009 or, in Northern Ireland, the Education (Student Loans) (Repayment) Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2009;”. Regulation 8 (Quarterly tax periods) The definition of ‘P’ and ‘L’ in paragraph 3 has now been amended and now reads; P is the amount which would be payable to an officer of Revenue and Customs under regulation 67G or 68 of the PAYE Regulations (periodic payments to and recoveries from the Revenue); L is the amount which would be payable to an officer of Revenue and Customs under regulation 54(1) or, in Northern Ireland 49(1) of the Student Loans Regulations (payment of repayments deducted to the Commissioners for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs) disregarding the reduction referred to in paragraph (3) of that regulation; Regulation 32 (Exceptions from compliance obligations) Table 3 has been amended in respect of the obligation to submit a return under PAYE regulations, the revised entry in the table is as follows: Regulation 45 (Mandatory electronic payment) Paragraph 2 has now been amended and now reads; Paragraph (1) applies regardless of whether a payment of tax is due under regulation 67G or 68 of the PAYE Regulations (payment and recovery of tax by employer). Regulation 56 (Application by the Commissioners for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs of sums deducted under section 61 of the Finance Act 2004) After paragraph 2 the following paragraphs have been inserted; (2A) For any tax period where as a consequence of paragraph (2) the qualifying sub-contractor pays an amount to the Commissioners for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs in respect of any liability referred to in that paragraph that is less than the amount the qualifying sub-contractor would have paid but for that paragraph, paragraph (2B) applies if the qualifying sub-contractor is a Real Time Information employer for the purposes of the PAYE Regulations. (2B) The qualifying sub-contractor must deliver to the Commissioners for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs a return under this paragraph stating the value of the sums deducted from contract payments made to the qualifying sub-contractor under section 61 of the Act (1) in the tax year to date. (2C) The return required by paragraph (2B) must be delivered within 14 days after the end of the tax period. (2D) If an employer makes an error in a return under paragraph (2B), the employer must provide the correct information in the first return made under that paragraph after the discovery of the error. (2E) But if the information given has not been corrected before 20th April following the end of the year in question, the employer must provide the correct information for the year in question in a return under this paragraph. The wording in paragraph 5 has been amended and now reads as follows; (5) The Commissioners for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs shall not repay any sum deducted under section 61 of the Act to the qualifying sub-contractor unless— (a) the tax year in which the deduction was made, has ended; and (b) either— (i) the qualifying sub-contractor has delivered the return required by regulation 73 of the PAYE Regulations (annual return of relevant payments liable to deduction of tax), or (ii) the qualifying sub-contractor has delivered to the Commissioners for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs each return required under paragraph (2B) for the tax year.” After paragraph 7 insert a new paragraph as follows; (8) A return under this regulation must— (a) state— (i) the employer’s HMRC office number, (ii) the employer’s PAYE reference for the purposes of the PAYE Regulations, (iii) the employer’s accounts office reference, and (iv) the tax year to which the return relates, and (b) be delivered using an approved method of electronic communications unless the qualifying sub-contractor is one to whom regulation 67D of the PAYE Regulations applies, in which case the return must be made in a document or format provided or approved by the Commissioners for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr17730
CISR17730 - The Scheme: secondary legislation: SI2013/620 This Statutory Instrument amends Reg 32 and Reg 56 SI2005/2045 and the revised text for each is as shown below. These amended Regulations apply only from 6 April 2013, and should be read in conjunction with the Income Tax (Pay As You Earn) (Amendment) Regulations 2012 (SI2012/822) and the Income Tax (Pay As You Earn) (Amendment) Regulations 2013 (SI2013/521) which allows for the introduction of Real Time Information (RTI); Regulation 32 (Exceptions from compliance obligations) Table 3 has been amended in respect of the obligation to submit a return under PAYE regulations, the revised entry in the table is as follows: Regulation 56 (Application by the Commissioners for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs of sums deducted under section 61 of the Finance Act 2004) The wording in paragraph 56(5)(b) has been changed to; (b) the qualifying subcontractor has paid to the Commissioners for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs — (i) any amounts the qualifying sub-contractor deducted from contract payments in their capacity as a contractor during that tax year, and (ii) any amounts due under the PAYE Regulations in respect of that tax year.” Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18600
CISR18600 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: contents CISR18610 Notification of sole-trader’s bankruptcy CISR18620 Company liquidations CISR18630 Company receiverships CISR18640 Voluntary arrangements Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18010
CISR18010 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: introduction | CISR18600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| SA records for sole-traders and partnerships are owned by the processing office responsible for the taxpayer’s SA record. Records for companies are owned by the relevant compliance office. However, no individual office ‘owns’ the records within CIS. Instead,they are centrally pooled in the CIS database and access is available to all authorised users, regardless of where located. Paper records are kept in folder CIS31/CIS91 (sole traders or partnerships) and folder CIS32 (companies) within the taxpayer’s file in the office at which the record was created. When the taxpayer’s SA or COTAX records are moved from one office to another, responsibility for the taxpayer’s paper CIS records also moves to the new office. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18020
CISR18020 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: folders CIS31/CIS91 and CIS32 | CISR18600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Digital Mail Service (DMS) post, such as CIS305 (which is scanned) is automatically retained for 3 years. Electronic submissions of CIS301’s, CIS302’s and CIS304’s submitted via are also retained on DMS and the same retention guidelines apply. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18030
CISR18030 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: source of taxpayer details on CIS system Most of the taxpayer record details held on the CIS system are taken from the parent SA or COTAX record which updates CIS every night. To alter this information you need to open the relevant parent system and make the change there. The change will then be visible on the CIS system the next day. The relevant parent systems for the various CIS taxpayer types are set out below. The identifier linking records in the two systems and allowing the flow of information is the taxpayer’s UTR. The flow is one-way. A change in the information held on the parent SA or COTAX record alters information held on the CIS record. A change made to the CIS record cannot affect the corresponding SA or COTAX record. Links to the Employer Business Service (EBS) system Where a CIS taxpayer acts as a contractor the CIS record is linked to the EBS system. In this case the linking identifier is the EBS reference and the CIS record is updated to reflect the EBS information on a daily basis. Guidance on how to amend the taxpayer details for a subcontractor drawn from the SA system can be found in the Self Assessment Manual (SAM) at SAM101000. Guidance on how to amend the taxpayer details for a subcontractor drawn from the COTAX system can be found in the COTAX Manual (COM) under ‘AMENDING CASE RECORDS’. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18040
CISR18040 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: concerns definition | CISR18600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Concern is the term used in the CIS system to refer to collective bodies or institutions. These include partnerships, companies, trusts, housing associations,development corporations and other public bodies. These concerns do not have a single owner but are usually owned or managed by a number of persons. Depending on the type of concern these persons may be partners acting for a firm directors (or sometimes a company secretary) acting for a company trustees acting for a trust officers acting for a public body or housing association For certain tax purposes beyond CIS these concerns need to be treated in different ways. However, for construction industry scheme purposes, they can be grouped together and called concerns. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18050
CISR18050 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: local authorities and public bodies | CISR18600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The CIS system uses the UTR as the main identifier for all CIS records so all taxpayers on this system must have a UTR. However, local authorities and other public bodies are not ordinary taxpayers and were not allocated UTRs when SA was set up. Arrangements have been made to assign UTRs to these bodies. For an in-depth description, please refer to CISR12090 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18060
CISR18060 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: changes in taxpayer type There are three main types of taxpayer for the purposes of the construction industry scheme; the sole trader, the partnership and the company. CIS subcontractor records are created when a parent SA or COTAX record exists and steps are taken to set up a CIS record. CIS contractor records are created when a parent Employer Business Service (EBS) record holds a ‘PSC’ or ‘XP’ identifier. Where a taxpayer changes type, there will be changes to the parent SA or COTAX records. Those changes will feed through to the CIS system. Likely changes of type and their implications for the various HMRC systems are described as follows A - Sole trader to partnership This change may lead to cessation of the sole trader source on the trader’s SA record. any necessary change to the EBS system. creation of a partnership source on the trader’s SA record. creation of a record for the partnership on SA and allocation of a UTR. issue of an application form CIS304 for each partner wishing to register for CIS on request only. Top of page B - Partnership to sole trader This change may lead to cessation of this partnership source on each of the partners’ SA records. any necessary change to the EBS system. creation of a sole trader source on the SA record for all partners continuing to trade as sole traders. issue of an application form CIS301 / CIS302 for the sole trader Top of page C - Sole trader to company This change may lead to cessation of the sole trader source on the trader’s SA record. any necessary change to the EBS system. creation of a company record on the COTAX system and allocation of a UTR. issue of an application form CIS305 to the company. Top of page D - Partnership to company This action may lead to cessation of the partnership source on each of the partners’ SA records. any necessary change to the EBS system. issue of application form CIS305 to the company. Top of page E - Change in the constitution of a partnership This is not a change in the type of concern, but some of the implications are similar. This action may lead to the need to change the partnership name. issue of an application form CIS304 for any new partner wishing to register for CIS on request only. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18070
CISR18070 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: subcontractors with no permanent address | CISR18600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| In order to be registered on the CIS system a taxpayer needs to have an SA record and an address on that record. It is the SA address that is displayed on CIS system records. This is also the address to which any CIS correspondence is normally issued. Where a taxpayer claims to have no permanent address or there is a particular problem with the postal delivery to an address, for example, where the subcontractor is temporarily lodging away from home and feels the address may not be secure, you must not use your office address on the SA/CIS record. Instead, the taxpayer must be asked to provide a suitable postal address. Identity checks The normal identity check requires that one of the two identifying documents shows the applicant’s address. In the case of applicants with no permanent address you will not be able to enforce that requirement. As long as you are satisfied that the person is who they say they are, you should accept any two other documents. See CISR42160 for a list of acceptable identifying documents. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18080
CISR18080 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: non-resident subcontractors and Business, Tax & Customs | CISR18600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Background The Construction Industry Scheme (CIS) applies to any payments made by contractors to subcontractors, as defined by the CIS legislation, for construction work undertaken anywhere within the UK. The Scheme has to be applied not only by businesses based in the UK but also by any non-resident businesses acting as contractors or subcontractors in relation to construction work carried out in the UK. Non-resident companies Business, Tax & Customs are now responsible for CIS related matters for all current and new non-resident companies that are not liable to CT because they are not trading in the UK through a branch or agency. Where you identify an existing non-resident company that has been set up on COTAX and is operating as a contractor/ employer, you should take the following action confirm with the appropriate technical specialist that they accept that the non-resident company is not trading through a UK branch or agency If this is confirmed you should proceed to transfer ownership of the COTAX record to Business, Tax & Customs, using office ID 290400, following the relevant COTAX Manual (COM) guidance send to Business, Tax & Customs at the address set out at CISR97040 . form CT48A CIS32 folder the company’s file , if held. Business, Tax & Customs will contact the non-resident company to confirm the transfer of responsibility. Any non-resident companies seeking advice on CIS related issues should be advised to contact Business, Tax & Customs directly (See CISR97040 ). Non-resident individuals and partnerships Business, Tax & Customs only has responsibility for non-resident companies and does not have responsibility, or ownership, for non-resident individuals or partnerships operating within the Construction Industry Scheme. For CIS purposes those cases should continue to be handled by the local processing office nearest to where the construction work is carried out. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18090
CISR18090 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: notification of sole-trader's bankruptcy | CISR18600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Where a court on hearing a bankruptcy petition is satisfied that a person has no reasonable prospect of paying their debts, a bankruptcy order (known as an award of sequestration in Scotland) is normally made against the debtor. The Official Receiver is appointed as an interim receiver of the debtor’s property pending appointment of a trustee in bankruptcy. The task of the receiver (or trustee in bankruptcy, if appointed) is to determine the extent of the debtor’s assets and liabilities and distribute the debtor’s property among the creditors. Insolvency is not covered in the CIS legislation and bankruptcy itself has no direct relevance to the Scheme. However, the circumstances associated with it often do. For example, the financial problems leading to bankruptcy may also have resulted incessation of the business. Where a bankrupt makes an application for gross payment status, this may need to be refused because HMRC arrears figure in the proceedings. Again, this is done not simply because the applicant is a bankrupt, but because the arrears, if arising within the qualifying period’, mean that the compliance test is failed. Where the bankrupt operates in the construction industry the following issues are important is the subcontractor’s trade continuing? does the taxpayer hold gross payment status? if so, should that status be formally cancelled? is the subcontractor also operating as a contractor under CIS? Where you become aware that a subcontractor holding gross payment status has been made insolvent, you should run an “ad-hoc” TTQT. This will inform you that if a TTQT was run now whether CISR would still allow the subcontractor to continue with gross payment status. An “ad-hoc” TTQT is run by using the function “Manage TTQT”, and this function will be available from October 2007. Cessation or continuation of business Where bankruptcy results in the cessation of trading, the implications for CIS are the ceasing of the CIS record (when this functionality permits). In some cases, however, trading will continue, such as in the case of a labour-only subcontractor where the business may be the only or major source of income. Then it becomes necessary to make the following changes to the SA system create a new SA record make arrangements to delete the NINO on the old SA record cross-reference the taxpayer files for the two records. Continued trading - contractor schemes When an individual is made bankrupt, any existing P(SC) or XP scheme will be ceased by the Employers Section. If trading continues under the oversight of the trustee and subcontractors are engaged, the Employers Section will open a new P(SC) or XP scheme in the name of the Trustee (INS2205). For the purposes of CIS this scheme should be associated with the sole trader’s new SA record. Taxpayer records on CIS CIS taxpayer records are fed from SA and COTAX so all of these changes to SA records have significance for CIS. For this reason when a second SA record is set up for a bankrupt whose business continues, a matching record needs to be set up on the CIS system. See CISR18100 for further information on partners’ bankruptcy. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18100
CISR18100 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: bankruptcy cases involving partners | CISR18600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The bankruptcy of an individual partner, where the other members of the firm are not insolvent, does not immediately affect the entitlement of the individual or other partners to hold gross payment status on behalf of the firm. Where, however, this event leads to the dissolution of the partnership, this represents a cessation of the firm. Where a bankrupt remains a partner in a continuing partnership and holds gross payment status on its behalf, they may continue to retain that status until such time the ongoing compliance checks may change the situation. The outcome of any subsequent ongoing compliance checks will depend on whether, for the relevant ‘qualifying period’ all tax on profits from the partnership, as chargeable on the respective partners, has been paid on time - if not, all the partners will fail. FA04/SCH11/Part2/Para 8(1). all other tax obligations imposed on this partner have been met - if not, this partner will fail but the other partners may retain gross payment status. FA04/SCH11/Part1/Para 4(1). It follows that if tax on partnership profits is included in bankruptcy proceedings, and that tax was imposed within the ‘qualifying period’, and remains unpaid when an application for gross payment status is made by any member, that application cannot succeed. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18110
CISR18110 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: company liquidations | CISR18600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Company liquidations may be compulsory or voluntary and in either case this event usually leads to the cessation of trade. However, you do require confirmation of this and should write to the liquidator to establish the position as described in the action guide at CISR18620 . Where you become aware that a company subcontractor holding gross payment status has been made insolvent, you should run an “ad-hoc” TTQT. This will inform you that if a TTQT was run now whether CISR would still allow the subcontractor to continue with gross payment status. An “ad-hoc” TTQT is run by using the function “Manage TTQT”, see CISR43650 for guidance on the use of this function. Continued trading - contractor schemes Where, unusually, a company in liquidation continues to operate as a going concern for a period it may engage subcontractors. If it does, the Employers Section for the company in liquidation will open a new P(SC) or XP scheme in the name of the liquidator (INS2205). For the purposes of CIS you should treat this as an additional scheme associated with the contractor company. The Centralised Employers Team, NICEO will need to link the contractor’s CIS taxpayer record with the new EBS scheme as a second scheme. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18120
CISR18120 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: company receiverships | CISR18600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| A receivership is where an insolvency practitioner is appointed to control the whole, or major part, of a company’s assets and property, for the benefit of a secured creditor. The practitioner is known as the administrative receiver and may be appointed by one or more debenture holders. In this context, the administrative receiver may also call themselves the ‘receiver’ or ‘manager appointed’. Administrative receivership can result in any of the following the control of the business being returned to its directors the appointment of a liquidator the sale of the business and its assets as a going concern Cessation When you become aware that a company has gone into receivership the important factors for CIS are whether trade has ceased if trading has not ceased, whether the day-to-day management of the company remains in the hands of the directors if trading has not ceased and the day-to-day management of the company is in the hands of the receiver, whether they expect to enter into new contracts for construction work on behalf of the company You should write to the receiver as described in the action guide at CISR18630 to establish these points. The action guide explains what to do in the various situations on receipt of the information. Sale of the business If a company in receivership is sold together with its assets, this normally involves the transfer of its shares to another person who has not previously been a shareholder in the company. In these circumstances the company is obliged to notify you of the name and address of the person to whom the shares were transferred or issued where the following apply the company has been allowed to retain gross payment status on the basis outlined above, or has made an application for such status and the company is a ‘close’ company and the transfer of shares arising from the sale amounts to a change in the control of the company within the meaning of ICTA88\S840. You would then need to investigate whether the person or persons who have acquired control of the company have satisfactory tax records. Continued trading - contractor schemes Where a company in receivership continues to operate as a going concern, it may engage subcontractors. If it does, the Centralised Employers Team, NICEO for the company in receivership will open a new P/SC or XP scheme in the name of the receiver (See the Insolvency Manual at INS2205). For the purposes of CIS you should treat this as an additional scheme associated with the contractor company. The Centralised Employers Team will need to link the contractor’s CIS taxpayer record with the new EBS record as a second scheme. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18130
CISR18130 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: voluntary arrangements | CISR18600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| A voluntary arrangement enables a debtor to come to a formal agreement with creditors regarding payment of their debts. Proposals are prepared by an insolvency practitioner called the nominee or, if the individual is already bankrupt, by the trustee in bankruptcy. The proposals are placed before a meeting of creditors and, if approved, with or without modifications, are binding on all creditors who are notified of the proposals. Once approved the voluntary arrangement is then overseen by an insolvency practitioner called the supervisor. Continuation of business In contrast to bankruptcy cases, which commonly lead to the cessation of business, voluntary arrangements are often entered into to preserve the business as a going concern. Where a participating taxpayer continues to trade and holds gross payment status, its formal cancellation is not appropriate, but the applicant’s compliance will be reviewed at the next Scheduled Review ( CISR49010 ). Top of page Contractor scheme An area in which voluntary arrangements differ from insolvency situations is the procedure where the participating taxpayer is a contractor or employer. In practice, the supervisor normally allows the taxpayer to continue operating the business, including the everyday operation of any PAYE/ITSC scheme in being. Unless, therefore, the terms of the arrangement indicate that the supervisor has become personally responsible for this aspect of the business, no special action is required in respect of any PAYE/ITSC scheme. For further information on gross payment status and voluntary arrangements see CISR46130 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18140
CISR18140 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: applications from liquidators and receivers | CISR18600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Where a company goes into receivership, its day-to-day management may remain in the hands of its directors or be taken over by the receiver. Where the receiver takes over the company’s management, and wishes to preserve the company as a going concern, they may enter into new contracts for construction operations on the company’s behalf. Exceptionally, the liquidator of a company may also enter into new contracts. Payments made to companies in liquidation or receivership may continue to be made on the basis of the company’s existing payment status, either gross or under deduction. Payments to insolvency practitioners for contracts before the date of appointment are covered at CISR18160 . Applications for gross payment status If a company already in receivership or liquidation submits an application for gross payment status this should be examined on normal lines. In particular, tax obligations arising in the qualifying period must have been discharged, and on time or the compliance test is failed. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18150
CISR18150 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: bankruptcy and applications for gross status | CISR18600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The mere fact of bankruptcy has no special impact on a bankrupt subcontractor’s entitlement to retain gross payment status. Such an application stands or falls on whether they satisfy the qualifying conditions at the time of application. Among these, of course, is the requirement that all tax obligations arising in the qualifying period must have been fulfilled and on time. Where, therefore, HMRC arrears figure in the proceedings, and the liability involved arose within the qualifying period under consideration, the application fails the compliance test. One outcome of proceedings in which HMRC arrears figure is that the individual is eventually relieved of the duty to pay these sums and the tax is treated as a Revenue Loss. You should note that this is the institutional recognition that the debtor is unable to meet their financial liabilities. It does not represent the positive discharge of tax obligations which is what is required to satisfy the compliance test. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18160
CISR18160 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: payments to insolvency practitioners | CISR18600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| A payment is subject to the Construction Industry Scheme if it is made by a ‘contractor’ to a ‘subcontractor’ or a ‘nominee’ specified by the subcontractor or contractor under a ‘contract relating to construction operations’. Certain events may occur, however, which prevent payment direct to the subcontractor, either through force of circumstance or legal requirements surrounding the event. These events include the bankruptcy of an individual subcontractor, or the liquidation or receivership of a company. For a contract entered into by the subcontractor before insolvency, any payment made after the insolvency event may be made to a trustee in bankruptcy or liquidator or receiver (in the case of a company). In these circumstances payment may continue to be made on the same basis that was in place at the date of the subcontractor’s insolvency. This is because, in strict legal terms, the recipient is not ‘the subcontractor’ or a ‘nominee’ of the subcontractor or contractor, but someone acting under an ‘operation of law’. It follows that a contractor who makes payment to an insolvency practitioner in respect ofa contract entered into prior to insolvency is not required to verify the insolvency practitioner should enter details of the payment on the monthly return. However, contractors are advised to obtain receipts for such payments. Guidance on payments made after the appointment of the insolvency practitioner is at CISR18140 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18170
CISR18170 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: cancellation of gross payment status - insolvency | CISR18600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The commencement of insolvency proceedings does not, in itself, justify formal cancellation of gross payment status held by an individual or a company. The need to cancel such status must be judged according to the change in the taxpayer’s circumstances leading to, or brought about by the insolvency proceedings how far these changes create the conditions justifying cancellation. Where you become aware that a subcontractor holding gross payment status has been made insolvent, you should run an “ad-hoc” TTQT. This will ascertain if a TTQT was run now whether CISR would still allow the subcontractor to continue with gross payment status. An “ad-hoc” TTQT is run by using the function “Manage TTQT”,but this function will not be available until October 2007. Cessation of business The most obvious change in circumstances that may arise from insolvency is the cessation of business. In this case cancellation of gross payment status can be justified under FA04/S66(1)(a) in that you would not now admit a gross payment application from this taxpayer. This is because the taxpayer no longer satisfies the qualifying condition that they (or the company, as the case may be) must be carrying on a business which includes the carrying out of construction operations or providing labour for such work. Tax arrears and irregularities Where the business does continue and HMRC arrears figure in the insolvency proceedings then this raises the question as to whether this feature, of itself, justifies cancellation of the gross payment status. In these circumstances you should run the automated checks (TTQT) to determine whether or not gross payment status should be retained by the business. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18180
CISR18180 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: retention of CIS paper records | CISR18600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Background HMRC must comply with the requirements of the Data Protection Act (DPA). In particular, the Department must ensure that personal data shall be obtained only for one or more specified and lawful purposes and shall not be further processed in any manner incompatible with that purpose or purposes shall be adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the purpose or purposes for which they are processed shall be accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date processed for any purpose or purposes shall not be kept longer than is necessary for that purpose or purposes. Within each file, there will be one or more of the following Returns Accounts pad Next Accounts Pad Assessment sub-folder ADP sub-folder CIS papers Investigation/enquiry sub folder Complaint papers CG/BES subfolders. Retention periods for CIS papers Forms that are applications, should be kept permanently in the CIS folder(CIS31/CIS32/CIS91). These forms should be kept permanently, even if superseded, to provide compliance with information in case of later problems CIS16 should be kept permanently CIS40, CIS41 - to be kept for the enquiry window. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Any doubts? If in spite of the above you find yourself still in doubt as to which documents are to be retained or destroyed as confidential waste, you should refer to the Record Retention Site available on the HMRC Intranet. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr18190
CISR18190 - The Scheme: miscellaneous: Customer enquiry referral | CISR18600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| You may get an enquiry from the customer as “front line” (Tier 1) staff that even after consulting the Customer Advisor Guide (CAG) you still cannot deal with. You may therefore have to “hand off” the call to Tier 2 staff. This is done in the majority of cases by using the E-form facility and Work Area Mailboxes (WAM’s). There are some exceptions to this, see below; Where the enquiry relates to the scope of the Construction Industry Scheme, or where you have a contractor wishing to verify 11 or more subcontractors, in these cases please refer to the instructions at CISR95050 . Where the contact is about an appeal where gross payment status has not been granted, the customer should be asked to put the grounds for that appeal in writing. If the caller has a ‘Status’ enquiry this should be referred to the CIS Compliance unit using the ESI tool. Where however you still have an enquiry that you cannot answer take the following action: Inform the customer that you cannot deal with their enquiry in full, and that their enquiry will be passed to someone who can, and who will call them back within 3 working days. Note in full the information requested or being supplied by the customer, including a note of their name, address and Unique Taxpayer Reference (UTR). Take a note of a contact telephone number for the customer. Complete an E-form with the necessary information to enable the responsible office to work the referral in full. Note that the E-form should be addressed to the Work Area Mailbox entitled “Other” for the responsible office, and that after the UTR you should show CT-CIS or SA-CIS as appropriate, depending on whether the enquiry comes from a Corporation Tax caller (Companies and Unincorporated bodies) or from a Self-Assessment caller (other callers). Note that the nature of the enquiry will dictate the place to which your E-form should be addressed. For examples of this see below: If the caller is chasing a response to a registration application made and the application was made more than 5 days previously, this should be referred by E-form to the National Insurance Contributions Office (NICO) CIS Team who will then take over the enquiry and telephone the customer back regarding their application. If the caller is responding to a Construction Industry Compliance enquiry then this will need to be referred to the originating office for the enquiry. All other cases that need referral should be sent to the Processing office for the customer, if this is not known by the caller, these details will be shown under ‘Designatory details’ in the function ‘View Customer’ (see CISR90000 ). Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr19600
CISR19600 - The Scheme: Agent guidance: contents CISR19610 Agent guidance Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr19010
CISR19010 - The Scheme: Agent guidance: Introduction | CISR19600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Under the Construction Industry Scheme (CIS), there are two types of authorised agent for contractors and subcontractors. These are Customer Level Agents and Scheme Specific Agents. The following sections provide an overview of these two different types of agent, the varying levels of authorisation of agents and an explanation of what steps must be taken before an agent can conduct CIS business with HMRC over the Internet. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr19020
CISR19020 - The Scheme: Agent guidance: Customer Level Agents | CISR19600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| A Customer Level Agent (CLA) is an agent that acts for a customer, be that a contractor ora subcontractor, in connection with their Corporation Tax (COTAX) or Self Assessment (SA)tax affairs and who then also deals with that customer’s CIS affairs. If the parent system (COTAX or SA) holds an authority on form 64-8 for an agent to act, that agent will automatically ‘flow’ onto CIS Reform provided only that the indicator within CIS, ‘inherit agent’, has not been set to ‘no’. So,if a customer already has a record in SA or COTAX and they register for CIS Reform, the name and address of their agent will automatically transfer, by overnight process, onto the customer’s CIS record. The CLA will then be authorised to act on all CIS matters but will not automatically receive any contractor scheme output. (For example: monthly returns – forms CIS300).This is because the agent’s window automatically defaults to ‘no’ for scheme output. However, if the contractor wants the CLA to receive scheme output, then HMRC must be informed either in writing or through a telephone call to the CIS Helpline.Any such written request should be made to the CT CIS Centre (see CISR97070 for the full address). Where a customer is in SA or COTAX and they register for CIS, the authority in favour of an agent normally extends to all subcontractor registrations and subcontractor output. Again, this is providing that the indicator ‘inherit agent’ has not, at any point, been changed to ‘no’. Where the subcontractor also acts as a contractor, the CLA will not receive scheme output.However, where a CLA acts on behalf of a contractor they will be able to deal with the verification of subcontractors unless there is already a Scheme Specific Agent ( CISR19030 ) allocated to the scheme. In that event, only the scheme specific agent will be able to verify subcontractors. Once the signal has been set so that the CLA is to receive contractor scheme output, this signal will remain in place indefinitely until that signal is changed. This is so even in the case where there is a change in the CLA. Any changes that are notified concerning an agent’s details by a Contractor or Subcontractor must be separately recorded in SA or COTAX as well as in CIS. So, if the SAor COTAX records have not yet been amended to show the new agent’s details, notification on form 64-8 must be passed to the CAAT team based in Longbenton to also update those records. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr19030
CISR19030 - The Scheme: Agent guidance: Scheme specific agents | CISR19600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| A Scheme Specific Agent is one that only acts for a contractor in connection with a specific CIS scheme or schemes. A contractor can specify a Scheme Specific Agent that is different to their Customer Level Agent. The Scheme Specific Agent will act for the contractor in connection with all matters for that particular Construction Industry Scheme including verification of subcontractors and submitting monthly returns on forms CIS 300. Scheme Specific Agents may often be payroll firms rather than accountancy practices. If no Scheme Specific Agent is appointed, then the system assumes that the CLA is acting,if there is one. By contrast, a CLA cannot ever act for a contractor in connection with a specific scheme where a Scheme Specific Agent has been appointed. So, for example, a contractor might operate four different Construction Industry Schemes but only have a Scheme Specific Agent for one of these. The CLA would therefore act for the remaining three but not for the scheme where a Scheme Specific Agent has been appointed. Large partnerships and companies are probably more likely to have a Scheme Specific Agentas well as a CLA. In some cases, a Contractor may have several different Scheme Specific Agents. For example, these might be payroll firms located in geographical proximity to the contractor’s various construction sites. Details of the Scheme Specific Agent are stored in CIS and can only be amended there. The name, address and reference number for the Scheme Specific Agent will need to be manually typed on to the record for each Construction Industry Scheme where the contractor wishes the Scheme Specific Agent to act. If a contractor has many schemes, information about the Scheme Specific Agent does not automatically flow from one scheme to another. When changes occur, it is necessary to manually update each scheme’s record. So, where an agent dealing with several schemes operated by a contractor changes their place of business, every scheme record will have to be amended to reflect that agent’s change of address. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr19040
CISR19040 - The Scheme: Agent guidance: Viewing a contractor's Customer Level Agent and Scheme Specific Agent where both are appointed | CISR19600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| There will be circumstances where a contractor has both a Customer Level Agent and one or more Scheme Specific Agents. These can be viewed as follows: Customer Level Agent From the ‘CIS Main Menu’, select the Contractor record and go into ‘View Customer’. If ‘Agent Details’ are selected from the top right hand corner of the window, the Customer Level Agent will appear. Scheme Specific Agent From the ‘CIS Main Menu’, select a particular contractor scheme for the contractor that you are considering. Then select ‘View Customer’ followed by, from the top right hand corner of the window, ‘Scheme Specific Agent’. Refer to the Action Guide at CISR19610 for more specific guidance on viewing agents. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr19050
CISR19050 - The Scheme: Agent Guidance: Authorisation | CISR19600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| A Scheme Specific Agent can be either: fully authorised to act by paper. fully authorised to act by Internet. authorised to act by Internet only. Fully authorised to act by paper This is where an agent is allowed to act fully on behalf of the scheme and will receive all output excluding paper monthly returns. As of 6 April 2016, online filing of contractors’ monthly returns became mandatory. If the agent wishes to receive all CIS output, this should be requested by the agent in a separate letter, as the 64-8 is not designed for this purpose. Fully authorised to act by Internet The agent uses the Online Agent Authorisation Tool to register for full authorisation. This is an electronic equivalent of a form 64-8 and the agent’s reference on the CIS scheme will be their Internet reference. Having used this tool, the agent will automatically receive contractor scheme output (such as contractor monthly returns – CIS300). Where an agent is fully authorised to act by Internet, that agent can also verify a subcontractor for their client and file returns on-line. Once an agent starts filing over the Internet, afterwards they will be expected to continue filing on-line. Therefore, the agent will not receive any further paper monthly returns. Where an agent is fully authorised to act by Internet, and his client is both a subcontractor and a contractor, the agent is not authorised to act for the customer as both subcontractor and contractor. The agent can only act for the scheme that they are specifically attached to. Where an agent who is fully authorised to act by Internet, no longer wishes to use the “e” channel, they will need to go to the HMRC website to de-register from the service. Once this is done an “e” message is sent to CIS which automatically updates, and converts the agent to acting by paper only. Authorised to act by Internet only An Internet only agent has limited authority and is authorised using the ‘Government Gateway’. The agent can use the e-channel to carry out CIS business for the scheme, but will not receive any output including the monthly return. However, on receipt of a written authority from the customer (or through a message from the e-channel) Internet only agents can be upgraded to fully authorised Internet Agents. As such, they will then be able to receive scheme output. Where an Internet only agent, no longer wishes to use the “e” channel, they will need to go to the HMRC website to de-register from the service. Once this is done an “e” message is sent to CIS which automatically updates, and removes the agent’s authority to act completely. This is done because the agent has no authority to act for the client other than in an Internet only capacity. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr19060
CISR19060 - The Scheme: Agent guidance: Conducting business over the Internet | CISR19600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| For an agent to be able to ‘transact’ with HMRC over the Internet concerning a CIS Scheme, that agent must already be enrolled for the PAYE / CIS agent service. Whilst existing PAYE agents at 6 April 2007 will acquire the CIS service by default and will not need to register and enrol again, they will need however to seek a fresh authorisation from their client to conduct CIS business as the original authorisation (Form FBI-2) covered PAYE business only. Agent’s who wish to perform verifications online, or wish to access the HMRC free filing application on behalf of their client, will need to get their client to notify HMRC of their authorisation. A separate CIS authorisation is required to act on behalf of each client for CIS online. This can be done by: Using the Online Agent Authorisation service or The Client authorising the agent at the Government Gateway (if their client is registered and authorised for CIS) or Completing the revised FBI-2 (available from the HMRC website). The completed form should be sent to the CT CIS Centre (See CISR97070 for the full address). This is not the case for existing SA or COTAX Internet agents. They, like new Internet agents, must use ORPA (On Line Portal for Registration of Agents) to obtain an HMRC PAYE / CIS Agent reference. The agent can then enrol for PAYE / CIS Agent services, once the appropriate authorisation has been gained from their client. Submitting Returns Any agent can file a return for a CIS Scheme. This remains the case even where HMRC have no record of an agent acting for a particular scheme. However, such an agent would not be able to correct an error on a return. Nor would they be able to perform any other functions, such as verifying subcontractors, on behalf of the scheme. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr19070
CISR19070 - The Scheme: Agent guidance: RLS agents | CISR19600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The following guidance relates only to Internet Agents. At present, it is not possible to change an internet agent’s address to show that the agent is RLS. As a result, there is a danger that scheme output could potentially be sent to an address from where the agent no longer trades. Therefore, where it is learnt that an internet agent has become RLS, efforts should immediately be made to try and find the agent’s new address. In the first instance, a telephone call should be made to the agent to try and establish the new address from which he or she is trading. However, where this is not possible, or the attempt is unsuccessful, the agent’s address should instead be replaced with that of the scheme. This will ensure that output (for example,monthly returns) is sent to the scheme that the agent represents rather than to an obsolete address. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr21010
CISR21010 - Authenticate customer: overview: introduction Introduction Under CIS, customers will be able to contact HMRC to register for CIS, verify subcontractors, and confirm details on monthly returns. They will do this by a number of different methods telephone visiting any HMRC office using the internet. Because of our commitment to keeping customer information confidential, it is essential that you know that the person wishing to use our services is the customer or someone whom you have on record as being authorised to act on their behalf. In order to ‘authenticate’that person/contact successfully you must first establish their identity and ensure that they know sufficient details relating to the customer to pass ‘authentication’. Where the contact is not the customer you must also establish that this third party has authority toact on the customer’s behalf. Authentication will be the same for both subcontractors and contractors. It is the nature of the business entity that decides how the authentication process works. That means different steps may be required depending on whether the contact is a sole-trader, apartnership and so on. Only after authentication has been achieved do you need to decide whether you are taking actions within CIS for the contact as a subcontractor, contractoror both. Contact History Once the contact has supplied the following a recognisable HMRC Reference (NINO, SA UTR, COTAX UTR, AO Reference or Employer Reference), depending upon taxpayer type and subject the name associated with that HMRC reference, and you can retrieve the record associated with that reference, a record will be made of that contact/call/access of the CIS record for that customer including customer name and reference subject of the call office ID where contact made to Contact Centre (CC) a unique ID for that particular contact where contact is by phone, data passed from the automated call distributor date and time of the contact your personal ID. Where the customer’s name and reference are matched to an existing record and the contact confirms they are the customer or represent the customer directly, for example as a director or partner, the contact record will be updated to show that the contact has been authenticated. Where there is a record of earlier bogus or suspect contacts it will be necessary to request additional personal details from the contact in order to allay your suspicions about the contact and sufficient to ‘Authenticate’ the caller. Once the ‘Authentication’ process is completed successfully you may move on to the purpose of the call/contact/access to the CIS record. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr22600
CISR22600 - Authenticate customer: authentication: contents CISR22610 Authenticate caller by telephone CISR22630 Using ‘Find’ facility to trace individual CISR22640 Using ‘Find’ facility to trace scheme CISR22650 Recording bogus contact by telephone or at HMRC Enquiry Centre (EC) CISR22660 Authentication of correspondence including application forms CISR22670 Authenticate customer or other representative during HMRC outbound call CISR22680 Using 'Internal enquiry' facility to bypass authentication Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr22010
CISR22010 - Authenticate customer: authentication: when to authenticate | CISR22600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| When to authenticate All access to the CIS record by face to face contact with the customer and by phone is done using the Authenticate Customer function covered in this chapter. To preserve confidentiality, each and every contact by a subcontractor/contractor, or the person acting on their behalf, must be authenticated. This applies whether the contact is face to face at an HMRC office, over the phone, or using the Internet. Because of the need to know the identity of the contact, the same applies with contacts initiated by HMRC. See CISR22020 for more about ‘By passing Authentication’and using the [Waive] button. For the Internet, authentication will be handled by the Government Gateway and the HMRC Portal and the initial access to the CIS Internet service will be using the same User ID and password that is used by the customer to access their other on-line services (SA/CT/PAYE). Remember that you are authenticating the customer not as a subcontractor or contractor but by the type of business entity of the customer. This means you are authenticating the customer as a sole-trader, partnership and so on. Only after authentication has been achieved do you move on to take actions on the system in the customer’s role as subcontractor, contractor or both. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr22020
CISR22020 - Authenticate customer: authentication: bypassing authentication - use of the [Waive] button | CISR22600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Phone calls to customers (Outbound) Authentication is necessary when you make a call to a customer to make sure that the person you are speaking to is the right person. Full authentication may not always be appropriate in all circumstances and may be bypassed using the [Waive] button (see below). Face to face contact Authentication is necessary in face to face contact with our customers to make sure that the contact you are speaking to is the person concerned or is someone authorised to act on their behalf. Full authentication may not be appropriate in all circumstances and may be bypassed using the [Waive] button. Before doing this however you should ask the contact to produce an accepted form of ID such as a passport, driving licence, original utility bill or official correspondence from HMRC. Dealing with correspondence Authentication is a normal part of dealing with customer correspondence requiring achange being made to their CIS record. You should only bypass the authentication process where you are satisfied as to the origins of the correspondence. Use of the [Waive] button The Management Information System (MIS) will monitor use of the [Waive] button indicating when full authentication has been avoided. Please remember that full authentication is the norm. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr22030
CISR22030 - Authenticate customer: authentication: authentication of a sole trader | CISR22600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Because of our commitment to keeping customer information confidential it is essential that you know that the person wishing to use our services is the customer or someone who you have on record as being authorised to act on their behalf. In order to ‘authenticate’ that person/contact successfully you must first establish their identity and ensure that they know sufficient details relating to the customer to pass ‘Authentication’. Authentication of sole traders To pass ‘Authentication’ the contact must supply Both ‘Mandatory items’ of information, and Three more items with at least one of these items being in the ‘Secure’ panel. Mandatory Items Full name or trading name Address (this can be either the traders personal address or trading address (if different), but the address should relate to the ‘name’ supplied. Secure Items SA UTR NINO AO Ref (if also an employer / contractor) EMPREF (if also an employer / contractor) Date of birth Passport (for visual inspection at Enquiry Counter only) Driving licence (for visual inspection at Enquiry Counter only) Utility bill (for visual inspection at Enquiry Counter only) Official correspondence from HMRC (or former IR or C&E) (Enquiry Counter only) Additional Items Telephone number Another address (home, business or communication) Nature of trade Date and time of last contact by customer Only after the person making contact has been authenticated successfully may you move on to the next stage dealing with the purpose of the call. Where authentication is not successful the call should be terminated and the contact asked to send details to you in writing. Where you are suspicious as to the origins of the call or the caller you should consider marking the contact as Suspect/Bogus and noting your reasons. Refer to CISR22650 for more details about this. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr22040
CISR22040 - Authenticate customer: authentication: authentication of a limited company | CISR22600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Because of our commitment to keeping customer information confidential it is essential that you know that the person wishing to use our services is the customer or someone who you have on record as being authorised to act on their behalf. In order to ‘authenticate’ that person/contact successfully you must first establish their identity and ensure that they know sufficient details relating to the customer to pass ‘Authentication’. Authentication of limited company To pass ‘Authentication’ the contact must supply: Both ‘Mandatory items’ of information, and Three further items of information, with at least one of these being taken from the ‘secure’ panel. Mandatory Items Name (associated with the reference supplied) Address (associated with the reference supplied) Secure Items COTAX UTR AO Ref EMPREF Official correspondence from HMRC (or former IR or C&E) (for visual inspection at Enquiry Counter only) Additional Items Phone number (associated with the reference supplied) Date and time of last contact by customer Company registration number (CRN) Nature of business Other address (CIS communications address, for example) Only after the person making contact has been authenticated successfully may you moveon to the next stage dealing with the purpose of the call. Where authentication is not successful the call should be terminated and the contact asked to send details to you in writing. Where you are suspicious as to the origins of the call or the caller you should consider marking the contact as Suspect/Bogus and noting your reasons. Refer to CISR22650 for more details about this. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr22050
CISR22050 - Authenticate customer: authentication: authentication of a partnership and partner | CISR22600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Because of our commitment to keeping customer information confidential it is essential that you know that the person wishing to use our services is the customer or someone who you have on record as being authorised to act on their behalf. In order to ‘authenticate’that person/contact successfully you must first establish their identity and ensure that they know sufficient details relating to the customer to pass ‘Authentication’. Authentication of partnership To pass ‘Authentication’ the contact must supply: Two ‘Mandatory items’ of information, and Three other items of information, one of which must be taken from the ‘secure’ items list. Mandatory Items Full name of partnership Address of partnership Secure Items SA UTR (of partnership) AO Ref (if also an employer / contractor) EMPREF (if also an employer / contractor) Official correspondence from HMRC (or former IR or C&E) (for visual inspection at Enquiry Counter only) Additional Items Phone number Date and time of last contact by customer Name of SA nominated partner Name of one other partner Number of partners in the partnership Only after the person making contact has been authenticated successfully may you move on to the next stage dealing with the purpose of the call. Where authentication is not successful the call should be terminated and the contact asked to send details to you in writing. Where you are suspicious as to the origins of the call or the caller you should consider marking the contact as Suspect/Bogus and noting your reasons. Refer to CISR22650 for more details about this. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr22060
CISR22060 - Authenticate customer: authentication: authentication of an unincorporated body (including a local authority) | CISR22600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Because of our commitment to keeping customer information confidential it is essential that you know that the person wishing to use our services is the customer or someone who you have on record as being authorised to act on their behalf. In order to ‘authenticate’that person/contact successfully you must first establish their identity and ensure that they know sufficient details relating to the customer to pass ‘Authentication’. Authentication of an unincorporated body To pass ‘Authentication’ the contact must supply: Both ‘Mandatory items’ of information, and Three other items, one of which must be taken from the ‘secure’ items of information. Mandatory Items Name (associated with the reference supplied) Address (associated with the reference supplied) Secure Items COTAX UTR (SA UTR if local authority) AO Ref EMPREF Additional Items Phone number (associated with the reference supplied) Other address (Scheme address or other) Date and time of last contact by customer Only after the person making contact has been authenticated successfully may you move on to the next stage dealing with the purpose of the call. Where authentication is not successful the call should be terminated and the contact asked to send details to you in writing. Where you are suspicious as to the origins of the call or the caller you should consider marking the contact as Suspect/Bogus and noting your reasons. Refer to CISR22650 for more details about this. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr22070
CISR22070 - Authenticate customer: authentication: authentication of a trust | CISR22600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Because of our commitment to keeping customer information confidential it is essential that you know that the person wishing to use our services is the customer or someone who you have on record as being authorised to act on their behalf. In order to ‘authenticate’ that person/contact successfully you must first establish their identity and ensure that they know sufficient details relating to the customer to pass ‘Authentication’. Authentication of a trust To pass ‘Authentication’ the contact must supply: Both ‘Mandatory items’ of information, and Three more items of information, one of which must be taken from the ‘secure’ items of information. Mandatory Items Name Address Secure Items UTR AO Ref EMPREF Official correspondence from HMRC (or former IR or C&E) (for visual inspection at Enquiry Counter only) Additional Items Phone number (associated with the address supplied) Other address Date and time of last contact by customer Name of one trustee Address of above trustee Only after the person making contact has been authenticated successfully may you moveon to the next stage dealing with the purpose of the call. Where authentication is not successful the call should be terminated and the contact asked to send details to you in writing. Where you are suspicious as to the origins of the call or the caller you should consider marking the contact as Suspect/Bogus and noting your reasons. Refer to CISR22650 for more details about this. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr22080
CISR22080 - Authenticate customer: authentication: authentication of an agent/capacitor | CISR22600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Because of our commitment to keeping customer information confidential it is essential that you know that the person wishing to use our services is the customer or someone who you have on record as being authorised to act on their behalf. In order to ‘authenticate’ that person/contact successfully you must first establish their identity and ensure that they know sufficient details relating to the customer to pass ‘Authentication’. To pass ‘Authentication’ the contact must supply all the usual items of authentication forthe client (as detailed under the various sections in this chapter). However, inaddition to supplying the necessary information about their client, anagent or appointee must also supply two items of information from the following Items Agent/Capacitor name Agent/Capacitor client reference number Agent/Capacitor address In order for an Agent/Capacitor to act for a customer, HMRC must hold a valid authority. This could be in the form of a verbal consent for a single call or letter orform 64-8 for a defined or indefinite period. Where the customer wishes an ‘appointee’ to act for a single occasion only you may proceed where the customer is also present with the appointee during the contact, and the customer has first been fully authenticated. Only after the person making contact has been authenticated successfully may you move on to the next stage dealing with the purpose of the call. Where authentication is not successful the call should be terminated and the contact asked to send details to you in writing. Where you are suspicious as to the origins of the call or the caller you should consider marking the contact as Bogus . Refer to CISR22650 for more details about this. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr22090
CISR22090 - Authenticate customer: authentication: authentication involving a nominee/third party | CISR22600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Face to face contact Where a CIS customer nominates a third party to act on their behalf during a visit to a local HMRC office this is acceptable provided the customer has first been authenticated successfully. Contact by phone Where a third party is authorised to act on behalf of a CIS customer in a contact made by phone to the Contact Centre, a full voice recording of that call will be made and kept for historical purposes. Where this happens as a one-off, as a result of a hand-over in mid-call, the call may proceed provided the identity of the CIS customer has first been authenticated successfully. Where the phone call from a third party involves matters relating to separate, known HMRC references, for example, an agent phoning on behalf of more than one client, these should be recorded as separate contacts. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr22100
CISR22100 - Authenticate customer: authentication: authentication of correspondence including application forms | CISR22600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Dealing with correspondence Authentication is a normal part of dealing with all customer correspondence requiring a change to their CIS record whether it be an application for a change of payment status, contractors Monthly Return or any other correspondence. You should only use the [Waive] button to bypass the ‘Authenticate’ window where you are satisfied as to the origins of the correspondence. You will be required to make a note on the CIS record to confirm your reasons for bypassing the authentication screens (See CISR22020 ).This action does not affect the need to be certain that the correspondence has originated from the customer or their appointed representative. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr22110
CISR22110 - Authenticate customer: authentication: suspect/bogus contacts | CISR22600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Suspect/bogus contacts Any contacts that have been marked as suspicious, are relevant to the current contact, and are three months old or less will be brought to your attention by the CIS system when the ‘Authenticate’window is opened. Where there is a previous record of abandoned or suspicious contacts for this CIS record (and phone number), or the caller provides incorrect responses to questions aimed at authentication, you will need to obtain additional further information from the caller to satisfy yourself as to the true identity of the contact. The ‘Additional’ items to be obtained are Phone number Trading Name Business address Nature of trade Date and time of last contact. Provided two of the above items of information are supplied, in addition to those required as part of the normal process, authentication can be treated as passed successfully. Only after the person making contact has been authenticated successfully may you move onto the next stage dealing with the purpose of the contact/visit. Where authentication isnot successful you should politely but firmly insist that you are unable to assist further until the caller can provide you with evidence to confirm their identity and ask them to put the matter in writing. In those circumstances the visit/call should be terminated and a record made of the reason (Refer to CISR22650 for how to record suspect bogus contacts). Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr22120
CISR22120 - Authenticate customer: authentication: contact history | CISR22600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Because the only access to CIS functions is by way of the ‘Authenticate Customer’ windows, a record will be kept in the Contact History of all contacts between CIS and our customers. Contact details will be recorded on the system of all accesses to CIS in the previous three months using a link to the Contact History. This information will flow from details that are recorded automatically in the Contact Centre and other HMRC offices at the time of phone calls and visits to local HMRC offices. The information contained within Contact History will include: Contact details (name, phone number (if known))* Date and time of contact Operator details (name, ID) Channel used for the contact (for example, phone, face to face) Direction of the contact (inbound/outbound) *Depending upon the task being performed this will expand to include: Employer Reference of the particular contractor scheme Purpose of the contact, for example, Verify Subcontractor Whether or not the contact was successful or terminated due to a failure to authenticate the caller. Where the phone call is to the Contact Centre the call will be recorded. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr31600
CISR31600 - Register and Maintain Contractor: Update contractor scheme details: Contents CISR31610 Update Contractors scheme details Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr31010
CISR31010 - Register and maintain contractor: overview: introduction | CISR31600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| This paragraph serves as an introductory overview of contractor records. For the contractor, the CIS system ensures that they make the correct payment to the subcontractor (gross or under deduction) as advised by HMRC during the verification process (see CISR50000 onwards). A contractor needs to be set up on the CIS system when they begin to engage subcontractors, this is done by first setting them up on the Employers Business Service (EBS) and an overnight process will then run creating the contractor record on CIS. All contractors have at least one contractor scheme on EBS and maintained by the centralised employer’s team (NICEO). Larger contractors who operate, and make payments of their deductions from employees and / or subcontractors to HMRC from more than one site, or where the business wants separate employee (‘P’ type) or subcontractor only (‘XP’ type) schemes can be set up with multiple schemes if required. Soon after a contractor record is created on EBS, the contractor will be sent a letter notifying them of their PAYE Tax Reference Accounts Office Reference When a new scheme is created, or an existing P (employees only) type scheme is amended on EBS to one of the following; a PSC (employees and subcontractors) scheme, or an XP (subcontractors only) scheme all EBS records with newly set ‘XP’ or ‘PSC’ signals will be linked by an overnight process to the CIS system. The CIS record will also be updated immediately if the scheme type is changed on EBS to a ‘P’ type scheme from a ‘PSC’ or ‘XP’ scheme, or is ceased. Important Notes There is no flow of information from CIS to EBS. To ensure that the EBS and CIS records match it is therefore very important that the centralised employer’s team is kept informed of scheme closures and changes in scheme type. Only by doing this will the EBS (and therefore CIS) record be updated, and the issue of unnecessary reminders or CIS penalties be prevented. If, at registration, the contractor’s UTR is not captured on to the contractor record in EBS (either because it is missing, incomplete or due to a processing omission) it cannot be shown on the CIS record. Such cases are known as ‘orphan schemes’. They will result in a priority work item being produced (Contractor Trace and Match) in order to establish the correct UTR for the contractor and enter this on to the EBS record. See CISR95620 for further details. In the meantime, operators working on CIS on ‘orphan schemes’ are restricted in terms of what they can do with the scheme until the UTR is obtained and the scheme is fully registered. (For ‘orphan schemes’, functionality is largely limited to ‘Correct Return Error’, ‘Update Customer’ and ‘View Customer’.) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr31020
CISR31020 - Register and maintain contractor: overview: ‘contractor schemes’ window | CISR31600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| To view contractor ‘Schemes’ window Where a CIS record exists and you have the necessary access rights, you will be able to view a list of contractor schemes recorded against a customer’s UTR. In order to view this contractor list you must first successfully authenticate the customer, their representative or the source of correspondence initiating the enquiry, (unless you are satisfied it is appropriate to bypass authentication) and enter the CIS record using the customers UTR. From the CIS Main Menu window this will show you any known current or historical contractor schemes associated with the customer you have selected. If there are more schemes to view than can be listed on the first page you should select either the subsequent page number or [next] to view the remainder on subsequent pages. However, if you access a contractor’s record using a scheme Employers reference or Accounts Office reference you will only be able to see the details for that particular scheme, and not any other schemes held (if there are any) for the same contractor. The information displayed on the Contractor Schemes panel of the CIS Main Menu window is as follows: Name - Name of the contractor scheme taken from the EBS record. AO Reference - The reference used to identify each Accounts Office record which is the reference under which the contractor makes payments of any deductions made to HMRC. Employers Reference - The EBS reference used to identify an employer for the purposes of PAYE. Status - The current status of the scheme, which will be shown as Active, Inactive, Ceased, Merged, Succeeded, Cancelled or ‘No Longer CIS’. View Scheme Details If you then wish to view records for any of the schemes listed, you should tick the box beside the scheme that you wish to view and then select ‘View Customer’ from the Main Menu. This will enable you to view further details related to that scheme from within the ‘Scheme Details’ window. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr31030
CISR31030 - Register and maintain contractor: Contractor ‘Scheme Details’ window | CISR31600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| To View Contractor ‘Scheme Details’ window This section explains the information displayed on the ‘Scheme Details’ window. Once the scheme has been set up on the EBS system an overnight process will run to establish the link from EBS to CIS. You will then be able to access the contractor record on CIS by one of three ways; Unique Taxpayer Reference (UTR) - this will display all contractor schemes associated with that UTR. Accounts Office (AO) reference - this will display the contractor record associated with that AO reference only Employer Reference - this will display the contractor record associated with that employer reference only Only limited changes can be made to a contractor scheme record on CIS and only whilst the scheme remains ‘Active’. No changes can however be made from the function ’View Customer’ from which as the name intimates is a view facility only. Any amendments needing to be made to the scheme records must be made through the EBS system, with limited changes to CIS being made through the ‘Update Customer’ function. Scheme Details From the Scheme Details window you are able to view details of all information held relating to the contractor scheme selected. The available tabs within this window to access this information are: Scheme Details Scheme Returns Scheme Verifications Scheme Agent Details Scheme Penalties Scheme Inhibitions Scheme Settlement Details Scheme EOY Totals For a more detailed account for each of these areas refer to CISR90000 onwards. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr31040
CISR31040 - Register and maintain contractor: overview: set up new contractor scheme | CISR31600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| To set up a new contractor Scheme To set up a contractor scheme on CIS the following is necessary an open XP or PSC scheme for the contractor on EBS An EBS scheme of the appropriate scheme type will be created as notified by the New Employers Helpline or the Centralised Employers team (NICEO) of the contractors intention to engage subcontractors. NICEO should then complete a form P510 and send it to the SA or COTAX Processing Office to inform them of the EBS reference for the contractor. Note: Any contractor or agent who contacts the contractor’s Processing Office to ask about setting up as an employer for an XP or PSC scheme should be asked to direct their enquiry to the New Employer Helpline (NESI) by either A telephone call to NESI on 0300 200 3211 Or Sending their new employer details to NESI through the New Employer Helpline email facility. Once a EBS record is set up with an XP or PSC setting, a daily update of the CIS system will draw details of the scheme from the EBS system onto the CIS system. That data will be maintained by the same daily update so long as the scheme is active. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr31050
CISR31050 - Register and maintain contractor: close contractor scheme | CISR31600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Close Contractor Scheme The closure of a scheme is most likely to be triggered by changes made by the centralised employers group (NICEO) on EBS and passed to the CIS record through the daily interface. The following reasons for closure can be actioned through EBS. Scheme ceased Scheme merged Scheme transferred Scheme succession Change of Scheme type: for example, employer with employees and subcontractors ceases to engage subcontractors (see the guidance at CISR31060 ). Where a contractor has ceased the centralised employers group (NICEO) will note EBS of the cessation. They will then send a WAM to the CIS Centre at Newcastle, so that penalty inhibitions and return exemptions may be set for the appropriate monthly return periods following the cessation. The CIS Centre at Newcastle will sometimes be the first to be notified that a contractor has completely ceased in business or that a contractor is insolvent. The CIS Centre Newcastle should take the following actions; Subcontractor - Only type scheme (XP) Close the scheme through EBS using the date the contractor last paid a subcontractor, or in Insolvency cases (where the date of last payment is not known) the date the contractor became Insolvent. Vacate any CIS penalties issued after the cessation date except where any of those penalties have already been appealed against by the contractor. In these cases the normal appeal process should be followed. Subcontractor and Employee type scheme (PSC) Take no action to close the scheme. Instead, you should change the scheme type from ‘PSC’ to ‘P’ on EBS. Use the date of the change as the date the contractor last paid a subcontractor, or, in Insolvency cases (where the date of last payment is not known), the date the contractor became Insolvent. Send a WAM to the centralised employers group (NICEO) requesting they take action to completely close the scheme on EBS. Vacate any CIS penalties issued after the cessation / insolvency date except where any of those penalties have already been appealed against by the contractor. In these cases, the normal appeal process should be followed. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr31060
CISR31060 - Register and maintain contractor: Update contractor scheme record | CISR31600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Updating a contractor scheme record The guidance on updating a contractor scheme record is wholly contained within the Action Guide at CISR31600 . This describes the various windows that can be seen within the function ‘Update Customer’ which is where the changes will be entered. It also tells you how to access the various fields as well as the necessary action to be taken to: update the contractor’s designatory details to include setting the ‘RLS’ and ‘Inhibit all Customer Output’ signals allow scheme output to be issued to an agent amend the scheme address and contact details as well as amending other scheme data such as inactivity start and end dates, the contractor’s preferred method of filing their monthly returns and entering the dates of any Employer Compliance Reviews carried out and so on. update or add scheme specific agent details. Temporarily Inactive Contractors Where a scheme has both PAYE employees and subcontractors (PSC) and the employer ceases temporarily to make payments to subcontractors, you will need to change the CIS scheme record to set the contractor’s period of temporary inactivity on the contractor’s CIS record. You should refer to the action guide at CISR67630 for more information on periods of temporary inactivity. Inhibit Output Signal When a customer dies the CIS system will automatically ‘inhibit’ the output of CIS correspondence such as returns. In doing so, an ‘inhibit output signal’ will be set on the CIS record. However, there may be occasions when you will need to set the signal manually, for example, where a customer has no fixed address or is a complaint case. Before you consider setting the signal manually, be sure to check whether or not an agent is authorised to receive correspondence. If so, consider whether it is still appropriate to inhibit output. If it is, select ‘Update Customer’ from the CIS main menu, and select on the ‘inhibit output’ box in the ‘Registration Details’ window. Remember that, once the signal is set, no automatic CIS correspondence will then be issued until such time as the signal is removed. Changes in Scheme Type Remember that the closure of a PAYE scheme in error will result in the closure of the CIS contractor record. For example, where a scheme type of PSC exists but the employer no longer has employees and payments to subcontractors are continuing, you will need to amend the scheme type to XP. If the scheme is closed in error, you should re-start the scheme on EBS using the appropriate re-start date, this action will also open the CIS contractor scheme record from the same date. You should note that where the scheme type needs to be changed from ‘PSC’ to ‘P’, before 23 November 2009 you had to make that change after the 6 April following the year during which the contractor last paid a subcontractor. ‘Inactivity’ was also set on CIS using the function ‘Update Customer’ (see CISR67630 ) from the month following that for which the subcontractor was last paid up until and including the month ended 5 April following this. Since 23 November 2009 it is now possible to make the change from ‘PSC’ to ‘P’ during the year using EBS once that change has been made, a period of ‘Inactivity’ is automatically set on CIS following the date of the change. Penalties will therefore not be issued for any return periods falling after that date. Example A Contractor makes their last payment to a subcontractor on 5 October 2009 (they have a PSC type scheme), and they will continue to have employees. The Scheme type is changed on EBS from PSC to P for 2009-10. Once you have updated EBS it will still continue to show the scheme type as ‘PSC’ for 2009-10 but, the Scheme type for 2010-11 onwards will now show as ‘P’. To prevent CIS penalties from being issued for the months after 5 October 2009, ‘Inactivity’ has automatically been set on the CIS record from 6 October 2009 to 5 April 2010. Issue of Monthly Return Certain signals set on the SA and COTAX systems that feed information through to the CIS system or the other feeder systems will cause the monthly return issue to be discontinued. They are the following: RLS Abroad Deceased Insolvency. Note: Remember that the link to the EBS system will not pick up changes made to the CIS record. To ensure that the EBS and CIS records match it is therefore very important that the Centralised Employers Team NICEO is kept informed of scheme closures and changes in scheme type. Only by doing this can you ensure that the EBS record is updated and the issue of unnecessary correspondence is prevented. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr31070
CISR31070 - Register and maintain contractor: overview: the monthly return | CISR31600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| General This section serves as an introductory overview of contractor returns. For deeper coverage see CISR60000 Monthly Returns. Contractors must make a return to HMRC every month showing the payments made to all subcontractors, whether paid gross or under deduction at the standard or higher rate. The return period covers an income tax month - which is from the 6th of one month to the 5th of the next. Issue of the pre-populated Return In most cases the return will be automatically generated and sent out by the CIS system. The process will run over the following cycle: 24th of the month - CIS system automatically generates returns that are needed for the previous return period (6th of the current month to the 5th of the next) and prints these in batches. 29th of the month - all returns automatically generated - to be issued by this date. 5th of the following month - (returns issued by the 29th above) to be received by the contractor. 19th of the same month - due date for returns for the income tax month just ended (6th of the previous month to 5th of the current) to be submitted to HMRC. The contractor return will be populated with details of the contractor scheme and details of any subcontractors shown on earlier returnsor verified by the contractor within the previous three months. It will then be issued by the preferred method of contact to the contractor. Issue of manual returns Although most returns will be generated and issued automatically by the CIS system, there will be occasions when you will be asked to issue one manually. This includes the following reasons, A contractor (or an agent) needs a replacement of a pre-populated return because they have made an error on the original return, and it is too late for one to be issued by the CIS system. A contractor (or an agent) needs a replacement of a pre-populated return because they have lost or mislaid the original return, and it is too late for one to be issued by the CIS system. A contractor (or an agent) who usually files electronically or on line is unsuccessful because of a hardware or software problem. A contractor (or an agent) starts paying subcontractors for the first time after a period of inactivity, and it is too late for one to be issued by the CIS system. A new contractor (or an agent) contacts you to say that they have started paying subcontractors for the first time, and it is too late for one to be issued by the CIS system. A stock of forms CIS300(Man) and CIS300CS(Man) should be held in each Contact Centre (CC) Network Office And anywhere else where a call from a contractor for a manual version of the monthly return may be requested. Top of page Printer Friendly Returns/Continuation Sheets This applies to contractors who were (prior to 6 April 2007) using software to print CIS vouchers and substitution continuation sheets for their annual return. These contractors will have advised HMRC (the Helpline) that it will pose problems for them to submit their monthly returns information either by ‘paper’ or online. They will be sent a supply of manual return forms and Printer Friendly Continuation Sheets (PFCS) for a maximum of 3 months. The contractor will need to contact the Helpline again after the 3 months are up if they wish to extend the agreement. The Helpline advisor will enter the period when it is agreed to allow the use of PFCS within Update Customer. The entry of a date in this field will prevent the issue of pre-populated returns until the date has passed. Top of page Periods of temporary inactivity This will occur when a contractor ceases to engage and pay subcontractors in a particular month. If a contractor has not paid any subcontractors in a certain month they must still submit a ‘Nil’ return. This is because without a ‘Nil’ return we would not be able to distinguish between a contractor that had not paid anybody in the period and a contractor who simply failed to make returns. However, contractors who anticipate that they will not be paying any subcontractors in the next six months can indicate as such on the CIS300 return. The issue of the monthly return will then be suspended for six months as long as the contractor returns are up to date in both the current and the previous year. If they are, then an ‘inactivity’ signal will be set on the CIS record at the time the return is logged. For information on setting and unsetting the Inactivity signal see CISR67630 . If the situation changes during that time and the contractor begins to pay subcontractors again they must either phone the CIS helpline or write to their HMRC office letting them know so that the issue of the monthly return is recommenced. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr31080
CISR31080 - Register and maintain contractor: overview: contractors in receivership | CISR31600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Contractors in Receivership When a contractor becomes insolvent an insolvency signal is set on the EBS record which feeds through to the contractor’s CIS record. When this happens, the system stops the issue of all CIS300 returns to all schemes associated with the contractor. Where a trustee, administrator, receiver or liquidator continues to operate the business as a going concern, the insolvency practitioner might use subcontractors. If this happens a new contractor scheme will need to be opened on EBS in the name of the insolvency practitioner (See PAYE Online Manual under Insolvency of Employer). Note that the contractor name entered on the CIS300 returns issued to the new contractor scheme will not include any reference to the insolvency. You should tell the insolvency practitioner to destroy any returns with the old scheme reference and only use returns showing the new reference Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr31090
CISR31090 - Register and maintain contractor: overview: electronic data interchange (EDI) | CISR31600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Electronic filing of returns Contractors may apply to submit their monthly return electronically by any one of the following methods using the Internet at by Electronic Data Interchange (EDI). using appropriate third party software Contractors who wish to file on line must first have signed up to the Government Gateway. This is an on-line registration programme, which then permits the user to access and file returns for CIS, End of Year and Self-Assessment over the Internet. Pre-populated returns will not be issued if the preferred channel is EDI or through third party software as these third-party software providers are authorised to generate approved substitute forms CIS300. For further information on each of the above electronic options see: CISR62660 Electronic Returns.Contractor ‘Scheme Details’ You will be able to see from the information held within ‘Scheme Details’, which can be accessed through ‘View Customer’ (see CISR90000 onwards), whether the contractor scheme is Internet Enabled Filing by Internet, or Filing by EDI. You will have view access only to the ‘Electronic filing’ window. The Electronic Business Unit only, can make changes to electronic filing information on the system. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr31100
CISR31100 - Register and maintain contractor: overview: Cessation of trade of Contractor | CISR31600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| There is no functionality within CIS to enable you to note the cessation of trade of a contractor. Any notification of cessation to operate in the Construction Industry will need to be passed to the parent SA/COTAX Processing Office, in order that those records may be noted. However, where a contractor permanently ceases to take on any subcontractors, but continues to act as a subcontractor themselves, then any such notification should be referred to the contractor’s End of Year section for the Contractor scheme. This will be noted on the Employers Business Service (EBS), and that information will flow over to CIS. The date the scheme ceased will be displayed under View Customer for the contractor under ‘Scheme Details’. If the contractor element of a scheme has ceased via either a Full Scheme Cessation or a Scheme type change to a ‘PAYE’ only type scheme the contractor must be advised that no further returns will be required to be submitted after the requested date of cessation or scheme type change date. This can be advised during the initial call to advise of their change in circumstance or via letter if the request has been received in writing from the contractor or a redirection from another HMRC department. Any outstanding CIS300 returns not received before the date of cessation, these are still required and need to be submitted, however, no returns are required after the requested cessation date. The contractor would need to be advised that if they did take on subcontractors again in the future they would need to contact HMRC to advise of the change of circumstances before submitting any new CIS300 returns to allow the scheme to be updated accordingly (i.e. reopen scheme if within allowable timescale or set up new scheme if not and scheme type change the non CIS scheme back to CIS) so that the new returns are correctly accepted by the system. Where the contractor informs you that they have ceased to trade or permanently ceased to engage subcontractors and there are CIS Monthly returns outstanding but the contractor has not informed you of the date when the last subcontractor was paid, you will need to take additional action in CIS after noting EBS of the cessation. The action to take is set out in the guidance at CISR65200 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr40000
CISR40000 - Register and maintain subcontractor: contents CISR41000 Overview: contents CISR42000 The registration process: contents CISR43000 Gross payment or payment under deduction: contents CISR44000 Turnover test: contents CISR45000 Business test: contents CISR46000 Compliance test: contents CISR48000 Appeals against refusal or cancellation of gross payment status: contents CISR49000 Scheduled review: contents Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr41600
CISR41600 - Register and maintain subcontractor: overview: contents CISR41610 Introduction CISR41620 Update Subcontractors details – Sole Trader CISR41630 Update Subcontractors details – Partner in a Partnership CISR41640 Update Subcontractors details – Company Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr41010
CISR41010 - Register and maintain subcontractor: overview: introduction | CISR41600 | Action Guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| This paragraph serves as an introductory overview regarding the maintenance of a subcontractor record held within CIS, and how to deal with applications to register for either net or gross payment status on forms CIS301 and CIS302 for sole traders, CIS304 for partnerships and trusts, and CIS305 for companies and unincorporated bodies. Detailed guidance on the changes you can make to a CIS record for a subcontractor are contained in the immediate paragraphs that follow. These will cover changes to a subcontractor’s name, address or telephone number and other designatory details. The paragraphs are arranged so that there is a separate information panel and action guide relating to Sole Trader’s ( CISR41020 ), Partnership’s( CISR41030 ) and Companies ( CISR41040 ). The instructions will also cover the issue of application forms for net or gross payment to subcontractors, the method by which subcontractors may submit an application, how any application is handled by HMRC and the tests that have to be passed for a subcontractor to gain gross payment status. Those subcontractors who have not registered if paid by a contractor for construction work, will have a deduction at a ‘higher rate’ until such time as an application is made to register, and the contractor has obtained a ‘matched verification’ for the subcontractor, see CISR51000 for more on this subject. HMRC has given an undertaking that all applications for net payment status from subcontractors will be dealt with as soon as possible after receipt, in normal circumstances this should be within 5 working days following receipt of the application. See the information starting at CISR42010 for detailed guidance of each of the different types of registration applications you could be working. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr41020
CISR41020 - Register and Maintain Subcontractor: Update Subcontractors details - Sole Trader | CISR41600 | Action Guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| This instruction explains how to amend information held on the subcontractor CIS record.You should ensure that you have the appropriate access rights in the Subcontractors Processing Office before you begin. To access this functionality you must first successfully authenticate the customer, their representative or the source of the correspondence initiating the amendment, unless you are satisfied it is appropriate to by pass authentication (See CISR22680 ). Where you wish to change the subcontractor’s name, any such request must be made by the subcontractor in writing, the only exception to this is where the subcontractor contacts you to advise you that the spelling of their name is incorrect. See the Action Guide at CISR41620 for a full explanation of the entries that can be made to Update the Subcontractors details for a sole trader. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr41030
CISR41030 - Register and Maintain Subcontractor: Update Subcontractors details - Partner in a Partnership | CISR41600 | Action Guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| This instruction explains how to amend information held on the subcontractor CIS record.You should ensure that you have the appropriate access rights in the Subcontractors Processing Office before you begin. To access this functionality you must first successfully authenticate the customer, their representative or the source of the correspondence initiating the amendment, unless youare satisfied it is appropriate to by pass authentication (See CISR22680 ). Where the details that you wish to amend relate to a Partner that is a Limited Company inthe Partnership, please use the information guide at CISR41040 that will explain the entries that you will need to make in respect of the Limited Company. Also where you wish to change the subcontractor’s name, any such request must be made by the subcontractor in writing, the only exception to this is where the subcontractor contacts you to advise you that the spelling of their name is incorrect. See the Action Guide at CISR41630 for a full explanation of the entries that can be made to Update the Subcontractors details for a partnership. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr41040
CISR41040 - Register and Maintain Subcontractor: Update Subcontractors details - Company | CISR41600 | Action Guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| This instruction explains how to amend information held on the subcontractor CIS record. You should ensure that you have the appropriate access rights in the Subcontractors Processing Office before you begin. To access this functionality you must first successfully authenticate the customer, their representative or the source of the correspondence initiating the amendment, unless you are satisfied it is appropriate to bypass authentication (See CISR22680 ). Having selected ‘Update Customer’ from the CIS Main Menu, you will be taken to the Update Registration window. Where you wish to change the company name, any such request must be made by the subcontractor in writing, the only exception to this is where the company contacts you to advise you that the spelling of their name is incorrect. Even so, in this situation you will need to pass this request to the COTAX processing office for the company, so that they can make the changes in COTAX, this information will then flow over to the CIS record. See the Action Guide at CISR41640 for a full explanation of the entries that can be made to Update the Subcontractors details for a Company. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr41050
CISR41050 - Register and Maintain Subcontractor: Update Subcontractors details - Trust | CISR41600 | Action Guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| To make any amendments to the CIS record for a Trustee of a ‘Trust’ Subcontractor, see the Action Guide at CISR41630 and follow the instructions and entries made in that instruction for a Partner in a Partnership. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr41060
CISR41060 - Register and Maintain Subcontractor: Update Subcontractors details - Unincorporated Body | CISR41600 | Action Guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| To make any amendments to the CIS record for an Unincorporated Body Subcontractor, see the Action Guide at CISR41640 and follow the instructions and entries made in that instruction for a Company. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr41070
CISR41070 - Register and Maintain Subcontractor: Update Subcontractors details - Cessation of trade of a Subcontractor There is no functionality within CIS to enable you to note the cessation of trade of a subcontractor. Any notification of cessation to operate in the Construction Industry will need to be passed to the parent SA/COTAX Processing Office, in order that those records may be noted. Where the individual or partner subcontractor held gross payment status at the date of cessation, PT Operations should change the tax treatment to ‘Net’ with 90 days’ notice using the instructions at CISR43610 to do so. Where a company subcontractor held gross payment status at the date of cessation, PT Operations should change the tax treatment to ‘Net’ with 90 days’ notice using the instructions at CISR43610 to do so. Note however, that where the company has already been ‘struck off’ then the CIS system will not allow you to make this change. These actions will avoid the Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) from running in the future and any resultant output from being issued to the customer. Ceased individual or partner subcontractors cases may also come to your attention when working Self-Assessment worklist W051 (see SAM125011). Where you identify that there is a ceased source within the construction industry from this worklist you should make a note of the case on to a spreadsheet and periodically send the spreadsheet across to PT Operations to review. PT Operations will then check to see whether the subcontractor holds gross payment status and, if they do, take action to change the tax treatment to net with 90 days’ notice check to see whether the subcontractor also acts as a contractor and, if they do, whether EBS has yet been noted of the cessation of trade note EBS of the date of cessation set Return Exemptions and Penalty Inhibitions (as appropriate) on the CIS record for the contractor to avoid unnecessary penalties from being issued. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42000
CISR42000 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: contents CISR42010 Introduction CISR42020 Application forms (Issue and completion) CISR42030 Application by internet CISR42040 Application by telephone CISR42050 Sole trader applications CISR42060 Partnership applications CISR42070 Company applications CISR42080 Trust applications CISR42090 Unincorporated Body applications CISR42100 Joint Venture applications CISR42110 Applicants in voluntary arrangements CISR42120 Applicants with power of attorney CISR42130 Applications from non-residents and companies not incorporated in the UK CISR42140 Applications in Welsh CISR42150 Identity checks CISR42160 Identification documents CISR42170 NINO CISR42180 Setting the ‘Inhibit Output’ signal CISR42190 Registration of subcontractors by NICO or the CT CIS Centre Hull where payments have already been made to the subcontractor or company subcontractor within CIS CISR42200 Registration for CIS - problem cases CISR42600 Action guide contents Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42010
CISR42010 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: introduction This paragraph serves as an introductory overview of applications by subcontractors who wish to register for either payment under deduction or gross payment status. The following guidance covers the application forms used by subcontractors when registering for payment under deduction or gross payment status for each type of subcontractor, and the various methods by which they may submit an application to HMRC. Subcontractors who have not registered will, if paid by a contractor for construction work, have a deduction at a 'higher rate' currently 30% until such time as an application is made to register, and the contractor has obtained a 'matched verification' for the subcontractor. See CISR51000 for more on 'Verification'. Registration for CIS Individual applicants (sole traders and partnerships) seeking to register for CIS can do so :- online by completing and submitting the relevant registration form or by sending a completed paper application form CIS301, CIS302 or CIS304 direct to PT Operations Companies and Unincorporated bodies wishing to register for CIS can do so :- online by completing and submitting the relevant registration form or by sending a completed paper application form CIS305 direct to PT Operations See how to register on GOV.UK Trust Registration applications will be dealt with in the Self Assessment (SA) Processing Office for the Trust or the Trustee, this may well be one of the specialist Trust offices (See TSEM1420 ). For Local Authorities, Government Departments or NHS Trusts that wish to register for CIS, these cases are set up in South Wales Area (Service), the relevant instructions in this Manual are as follows: Note : It is therefore vitally important that where you receive a paper application to register for CIS that these applications are forwarded to the correct owning office for the applicant on the day of receipt of the application by HMRC. Prerequisites of CIS registration To register for CIS, either for gross payment or payment under deduction, sole traders and partners within firms must have previously registered for SA on a self-employed basis and have a live SA record, though this can be done at the same time as the CIS registration. Companies will need to have registered for COTAX and have a live COTAX record. For a sole trader or a partner in a partnership without a National Insurance number (NINO), they will be asked to apply for a United Kingdom NINO and to do that they will be asked to attend an ‘Evidence of Identity interview’ at the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP), see CISR42170 for more information about the NINO. Any applicant seeking to register for CIS without a UK NINO will be told about this when first contacting HMRC. CIS Helpline The CIS helpline no longer completes requests for CIS registrations and is not able to register any applicants for SA or COTAX. The CIS helpline may need to advise the applicant to contact the DWP where the applicant has been asked to apply for a UK NINO and to possibly undergo an identity check (see CISR42150 ). In company cases, the hand-off will be to the Local Processing Office. In all cases, the CIS hlepline should advise the applicant of the online CIS journey (detailed above) or of the paper CIS registration form (CIS301, CIS302, CIS304 or CIS305). Additionally, where the applicant is not yet registered for corporation tax under COTAX or self employment under SA they should be advised to do so. Where the applicant does not hold a verifiable UK NINO, see the guidance at CISR42170 . DWP If it is clear that the customer is not in a position to be dealt with by these methods, then the appropriate forms will be given to the customer and they will be asked to contact DWP to arrange an ‘Evidence of Identity interview’ where appropriate, (see CISR42170 ). The applicant will also be asked to provide evidence to show that the Business Test (see CISR45000 ) and Turnover Test (see CISR44000 ) are passed. If an identity check is not required, the customer will be told to complete the necessary application forms and send them direct to the address printed on them where the registration process will be undertaken for CIS (and for SA or COTAX, if required). Helpline for the Newly Self-Employed (HNSE) HMRC also has a Helpline for the Newly Self-Employed (HNSE) and customers can ring this unit to be registered for self employment. The setting up of a customer for self employment at HNSE involves the creation of the appropriate record on the NIRS2 system and an electronic form CWF1 which then goes to NICO Central Agent Authorisation Team (CAAT) for the creation of an SA record. Callers also often wish to register for CIS at the same time. In all cases where a caller wishes to register for both self-employment and CIS (for net payment only), HNSE will now create an electronic form CWF1 that will indicate the caller's wish to register for CIS. The electronic CWF1 will be sent to NICO CAAT who will be able to identify it as a CIS registration and give it priority in order to achieve HMRC's aim of turning round CIS registrations for net payment status within 15 days. HNSE will only be able to take this action where the caller is seeking to register for net payment and already has a NINO. This process allows the CIS registration to be undertaken quickly and it also avoids the need for the completion of a CIS registration form CIS301 as nearly all the information on the CIS301 is also on the form CWF1. The Recommended Route for CIS Applicants It is recognised that applications to register for CIS need to be processed quickly as any delays in the registration process could mean the difference between deductions being made from the subcontractor's payments at 30% instead of the standard rate of 20% or even payment being made gross. HMRC has given an undertaking that all applications for net payment status from subcontractors will be dealt with as soon as possible after receipt. In normal circumstances, this should be within 15 working days following the receipt of the application. It is recommended therefore, that if the caller contacts the CIS helpline and needs to register for both CIS and SA, and does have a valid NINO, the customer should then be referred to online access register for self assessment or the HNSE but this route will not be appropriate where the customer is seeking to register for gross payment. However, if the caller contacts the CIS helpline and needs to register for both CIS and SA, but doesn't have a valid NINO, the applicant should be asked to apply for a UK NINO by telephoning the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) on 0845 600 0643. As part of this process, they will be asked to attend an Evidence of Identity interview and they should not, in CIS registration cases, be referred to the HNSE. Where the customer claims they do not need a UK NINO because they do not have to pay UK National Insurance, see the guidance at CISR42170 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42020
CISR42020 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: application forms (issue and completion) Application forms Application forms for registration with payment under deduction are available for completion and submission online at GOV.UK see How to register . Applicants should ensure they have a UTR and that a live SA or a live COTAX record is held. gross payment status, which also serves as a change of tax treatment (payment under deduction to gross) are available for completion and submission online at GOV.UK see How to get gross payment status . The type of form depends on the type of applicant. Applicants should ensure they have a UTR and that a live SA or a live COTAX record is held. This is the quickest and most secure way to deal with applications. Application forms are also available to print and post. The type of form depends on the type of applicant. The forms available are as follows: Paper application forms must be fully completed in order for registration to take place. If the form is not fully completed it should be returned to the applicant with a covering letter detailing the omissions from the form that require completion before you are able to register the applicant for CIS. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42030
CISR42030 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: application by internet Applications for net payment or gross payment over the internet are currently available. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42040
CISR42040 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: application by telephone Applicants cannot register for CIS by telephone. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42050
CISR42050 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: sole trader applications A sole trader can register for CIS by completing and submitting a form online via GOV.UK see How to register by completing a paper application form - CIS301 (registration for payment under deduction - sole trader) A sole trader can register for CIS with gross payment status by completing and submitting a form online via GOV.UK see How to get gross payment status by completing a paper application form CIS302 (registration for gross payment - sole trader) CIS registration for Subcontractors is only required once unless there is a change to the business structure e.g sole trder is incorporated. Before an application can be processed, applicants should ensure there is a live Self-Assessment (SA) record for the sole trader concerned the applicant must hold a UK verifiable NINO. Where the applicant says they do not have a UK NINO, see the guidance at CISR42170 . All registration applications made by Individuals will be dealt with by PT Operations. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Partnership becoming a sole trader(s) Should you encounter a situation where, a partnership is dissolved with one partner carrying on the business as a sole trader, or two partners carrying on two separate businesses as sole traders you may need to seek advice about the turnover being used by the sole trader(s) in registering for CIS. See also CISR42130 in respect of applications from non-residents. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42060
CISR42060 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: partnership applications A registering Partner in a Partnership can register for CIS with payment under deduction by completing and submitting a form online via GOV.UK see How to register by completing a paper application form - CIS304 (Partnership registration (payment under deduction and gross)) A registering Partner in a Partnership can register for CIS with gross payment status by completing and submitting a form online via GOV.UK see by completing a paper application form - CIS304 (Partnership registration (payment under deduction and gross)) CIS registration for Subcontractors is only required once unless there is a change to the business structure e.g sole trader is incorporated. Before an application can be processed, applicants should ensure there is a live Self-Assessment (SA) record for the partnership and for each partner within the partnership. the partner must hold a UK verifiable NINO. Where the applicant says they do not have a UK NINO, see the guidance at CISR42170 . (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) The only persons within a partnership that need to register for CIS are those who will be paid on behalf of the partnership by contractors, it is not necessary for those partners who are not being paid on behalf of the partnership to register for CIS. All registration applications made by Partnerships will be dealt with by PT Operations. However there will be occasions when the team will not be able to deal with an application, where for example, the application form shows different details or partners than those shown on the Self-Assessment record. These applications will be worked by PT Operations CAAT SESA teams so records are amended and updated correctly. See also CISR42130 in respect of applications from non-residents. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42070
CISR42070 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: company applications A Company can register for CIS with payment under deduction by completing and submitting a form online via GOV.UK see How to register by completing a paper application form CIS305 (Company registration (payment under deduction and gross)) A Company can register for CIS with gross payment status by completing and submitting a form online via GOV.UK see How to get gross payment status by completing a paper application form CIS305 (Company registration (payment under deduction and gross)) CIS registration for Subcontractors is only required once unless there is a change to the business structure e.g sole trader is incorporated. Two things are needed before registration can proceed: there must be a live Corporation Tax (CTSA) record for the Company, and where the company is applying for gross payment status there must be a live Self-Assessment (SA) record for each director and/or company secretary. However, please also see the text under ‘Directors Information’ below. See also CISR42130 in respect of applications from non-resident companies. Directors' information Company applications for gross payment must include full information about the company's directors. However, for applications for net payment, we do not ask for directors' information as part of the company's application. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42080
CISR42080 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: Trust applications A Trust can register for CIS with payment under deduction by completing and submitting a form online via GOV.UK see How to register by completing a paper application form CIS304 (Partnership registration (payment under deduction and gross)) A Trust can register for CIS with gross payment status by completing and submitting a form online via GOV.UK see How to get gross payment status by completing a paper application form CIS304 (Partnership registration (payment under deduction and gross)) Two things are needed before registration can proceed: there must be a live Self-Assessment (SA) record for the Trust there must be a live Self-Assessment (SA) record for the Trustee applying. Where the trust is a Limited Company, a form online via GOV.UK see How to register , How to get gross payment status or a paper application form CIS305 should be used by the trust to register. Two things are needed before registration can proceed there must be a live Corporation tax (COTAX) record for the Limited Company Trust there must be a live Self-Assessment (SA) record for the Trustee applying CIS registration for Subcontractors is only required once unless there is a change to the business structure e.g sole trader is incorporated. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42090
CISR42090 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: unincorporated body applications An Unincorporated Body can register for CIS with payment under deduction by completing and submitting a form online via GOV.UK see How to register by completing a paper application form CIS305 (Company registration (payment under deduction and gross)) An Unincorporated Body can register for CIS with gross payment status by completing and submitting a form online via GOV.UK see How to get gross payment status by completing a paper application form CIS305 (Company registration (payment under deduction and gross)) CIS registration for Subcontractors is only required once unless there is a change to the business structure e.g sole trader is incorporated. Two things are needed before registration can proceed there must be a live Corporation Tax (COTAX) record for the Unincorporated Body there must be a live Self-Assessment (SA) record for the member of the Unincorporated Body applying. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42100
CISR42100 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: Joint Venture applications | CISR42600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Applications from Joint Ventures should broadly be worked in the same way as any application from a Partnership. This is so even where the partners in the Joint Venture are themselves all Limited Companies. The application form CIS304 should be completed as far as is possible, with one of the parties to the Joint Venture being the registering partner and the other parties to the Joint Venture being shown as partners on the application form. In the case of a 50/50 arrangement, either company secretary may sign the application form. However where the Joint Venture itself is a Limited Company then the companies participating in the Joint Venture will be corporate directors, and in this instance the application form to be completed will be the CIS305 for a Company. When registering a Joint Venture you must be careful that the Joint Venture is an entity that stands in its own right as a separate and distinct business apart from the businesses of the partners who make up the Joint Venture. Therefore, you should request sight of the Joint Venture agreement between the parties to confirm that there is a Joint Venture in place rather than a ‘JANE’ (Joint Association No Entity) before the registration application is processed. Once you have received the Joint Venture agreement you should proceed as in CISR42730 . To process applications from an unincorporated Joint Venture which is comprised of companies only, you will also need to create a partner Self-Assessment (SA) record for each Limited Company that is a partner, in addition to the Partnership SA record. You do this using the function ‘Set up Company’ and using the company’s COTAX Unique Taxpayer Reference (UTR). (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42110
CISR42110 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: applicants in voluntary arrangements | CISR42600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| A voluntary arrangement enables a debtor to come to a formal agreement with creditors regarding payment of their debts. Proposals are prepared by an insolvency practitioner called the nominee or, if the individual is already bankrupt, by the trustee in bankruptcy. The proposals are placed before a meeting of creditors and, if approved, with or without modifications, are binding on all creditors who are notified of the proposals. Once approved the voluntary arrangement is then overseen by an insolvency practitioner called the supervisor. A voluntary arrangement can be of varying length, but usually lasts between three and five years. The creditors agree with the debtor what ‘dividend’ is expected out of the voluntary arrangement. This dividend is expressed as being pence in the pound and represents the amount the creditor can expect to receive from the debtor for every £1 of debt the debtor owes. Example; A dividend of 21p means that if the debtor owed £1000, his creditor(s) in total could expect to receive £210 towards the total debt owed Once the voluntary arrangement has come to an end, this dividend is taken as satisfying in full all of the debts that the debtor owes to their creditors. Continuation of business In contrast to bankruptcy cases, which commonly lead to the cessation of business, voluntary arrangements are often entered into to preserve the business as a going concern. Where a participating taxpayer continues to trade, cancellation of gross payment status is not appropriate. However, the business would have had to continue to pay all its tax liabilities on time to ensure it met the compliance obligations. Top of page Contractor Scheme An area where voluntary arrangements differ from insolvency situations is the procedure where the participating taxpayer is a contractor or employer. In practice, the supervisor normally allows the taxpayer to continue operating the business, including the everyday operation of any PAYE/CIS scheme in being. Unless therefore, the terms of the voluntary arrangement indicates that the supervisor has become personally responsible for this aspect of the business, no special action is required in respect of any PAYE/CIS scheme (see INS3313). Top of page Application for gross payment status Applications for gross payment status from participants in voluntary arrangements present special problems because of the likely compliance failures. The guidance at CISR46130 details the action that you should take in these cases. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42120
CISR42120 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: applicants with power of attorney | CISR42600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The CIS system makes provision for subcontractors who have people acting for them as power of attorney. These cases are extremely rare. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42130
CISR42130 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: applications from non-residents and companies not incorporated in the UK | CISR42600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Under CIS, all subcontractors carrying out construction operations in the United Kingdom are advised to register for CIS. If a subcontractor does not register they will be subject to a higher rate deduction on all payments made to them. The same applies to non-resident subcontractors. It does not matter where the payment is actually made; if the construction work is carried out in the UK then the Scheme applies to that payment. To register, a subcontractor first needs to be registered for Self-Assessment (SA). Most non-resident subcontractors will not have a NINO that can be verified so will therefore need to call in for an identity check. See the guidance at CISR42170 for applicants who do not hold a UK verifiable NINO and the guidance at CISR42150 and CISR42160 about the identity check and acceptable identifying documents. Reminder Note that any reference to a non-resident business also includes any subcontractor or contractor operating from the Republic of Ireland (Eire) where they have no UK base and are not liable to Corporation Tax (CT) in the UK. Individuals and partnerships Refer to the SA Manual at SAM100000 onwards for detailed guidance on setting up SA records for individuals and partnerships. The general intention is that the records for these non-resident subcontractors will be dealt with in the office covering the area in which the construction work is carried out. Companies Specialist PT is responsible for all CIS related matters for all current and new non-resident companies that are not liable to CT, because they are not trading in the UK through a branch or agency. NINO checks Any cases of non-resident applications that result in a validated UK NINO need to be looked into as they indicate a mistake or possibly a cause for concern. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Other sources of information on non-residents An HMRC booklet, CIS340 is available and outlines the scope of the Construction Industry Scheme for non-resident subcontractors and contractors. Subcontractor individuals, partnerships or companies with questions on permanent establishment and/or questions about Double Taxation Agreements should contact Specialist PT (see CISR97040 ). Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42140
CISR42140 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: applications in Welsh | CISR42600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| All applications made in Welsh will be processed in North Wales Area - Porthmadog. If the ‘Welsh signal’ is set on the Self-Assessment (SA) record this will automatically cut across to the CIS system. The ‘Welsh signal’ will generate the issue of forms in Welsh. You should advise any applicant requiring a Welsh version of the form and/or notes to telephone the Welsh Language Helpline on 0300 200 1900. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42150
CISR42150 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: identity checks | CISR42600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| All newly self-employed customers registering for Self Assessment (SA) only, or SA and CIS, must establish their identity before their registration can be processed. The proper way to do this is for the person to provide a verifiable National Insurance Number (NINO). You should therefore ask all customers registering for SA, or SA and CIS, to supply a NINO. Any customer without a NINO should be advised to apply for one by telephoning the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) on 0845 600 0643. As part of this process, they will be asked to attend an Evidence of Identity interview, and once the customer has their NINO, the SA/CIS registration process can proceed as normal. However, you should be aware that not every customer will need a NINO because, in a very few cases, they do not have to pay UK National Insurance. Therefore, if anyone seeking registration for SA and CIS, tells you that they are not liable for National Insurance in the UK, you should allow them to use the alternative process set out below. Alternative process for customers claiming not to be liable for UK National Insurance (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) CISR42160 (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Customers from the Isle of Man Residents of the Isle of Man should have been issued with NINOs commencing with the letters ‘MA’. These NINOs are valid in the UK and NIM39620 refers. Identity checks Any applicant without a UK NINO and who has to undertake an HMRC identity check should also be asked to produce evidence with their CIS application to show that they pass the ‘business test’ (see CISR45000 ) and also that they have sufficient turnover to pass the turnover test, (see CISR44000 ). The application form should then be endorsed to show that evidence to pass these two tests has been seen by HMRC. To carry out the identity check the applicant should be asked to present their passport together with one other document showing their address. A list of acceptable identifying documents can be found at CISR42160 . Identifying documents For the purposes of registration you must be satisfied that the person making the application is who they purport to be from the identifying documents presented to you. Remember, you should not, under any circumstances, become involved in any issues surrounding nationality right of entry to the UK, or right to work in the UK. We have no authority to ask questions about these matters which are for the Home Office to determine. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42160
CISR42160 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: identification documents You need to be sure that the person presenting themselves is who they say they are. This is why the applicant needs to bring at least two identifying documents for an identification check, one of which should be the applicant’s passport and one document should include the applicant’s current address.. You need to be satisfied about the adequacy of the identity documents being presented to you, and you should not register the person unless you are satisfied. If necessary ask the applicant to supply further evidence. It is preferable that the address shown on one of the identifying documents should match that on the applicant’s application form or Self-Assessment (SA) record. Remember that a subcontractor may be working away from home for an extended period and may want correspondence concerning their application to be sent somewhere other than their permanent address. You will be able to check the address against that on the application form and if that matches then the identifying document is satisfactory. Acceptable documents Remember you are merely trying to confirm that the person making the application is who they purport to be. The following are examples of original documents you can accept. This list is not exhaustive. The documents presented to you should be the original documents. You should only accept photocopies where there is a valid reason for the applicant not to produce the originals. If you have any concerns regarding the documentation presented you should consult a Higher Officer for guidance. Bogus identifying documents You should be on the look out for bogus identity check documents. Where you have any doubt about the documents presented, you should not accept them and ask the applicant to provide other documentation. You should not, however, seize or retain any documents presented to you that you believe to be false. We generally have no legal right to take such documents from applicants in this way and to do so may leave the Department open to legal action in certain cases. Recording the forms of identity produced You should record, in the appropriate box on the application form, the forms of identity provided by the subcontractor and shown to you. You also need to complete the ‘Register Subcontractor’ ‘ID Check’ window with details of the documentation that has been provided. Please note that only 1 line is provided to input details of ‘other’ documents. You may therefore, need to use abbreviations to enable you to input the necessary information. If you are not satisfied with the documents produced you should explain to the applicant that they will not be able to register for CIS until adequate proof of identity is provided. Photocopied documents Photocopies of original documents should not normally be used to establish identity and you should only accept photocopies when there is a valid reason for the applicant not to present the originals. For example, there is unlikely to be a valid reason why an applicant should produce photocopies of utility bills in preference to the original documents themselves. You should ask yourself why someone would go to the trouble of photocopying their utility bill when it must be easier to produce the original documents. It may be that the applicant never had the original bills and was given/sold the photocopies by someone else. In all cases you should insist on seeing the original documents for all utility bills and any other letters or forms that may be presented to you where no valid, acceptable explanation is offered as to where the originals are. An exception to this rule may be in relation to an applicant’s passport that has been retained by the Home Office in connection with the applicant’s application for asylum or residency in the UK. However, in all cases where the Home Office retains an applicant’s passport for these purposes, the applicant is given a photocopy of their passport that has been officially endorsed with a Home Office stamp. If you are presented with one of these documents, check to see if the official stamp has been imprinted on to the photocopy itself - which is OK. If the stamp was imprinted before the document was photocopied you should ask to see the actual document given to the applicant by the Home Office. Foreign documents If you are presented with one or more foreign documents in support of an applicant’s identity, you should normally accept these where you are able to read them and are reasonably content as to their provenance. For example, if you are presented with a passport, national ID card or driving licence that bears the applicant’s details and, quite often, their photograph, you may accept this if you are reasonably content that you know what it is and that it was issued to the applicant. On the other hand if you are presented with a document that you cannot understand, or you have reason to believe that it is not an officially issued document from the applicant’s home country, you should refuse to accept it. In such cases, the applicant should be advised to return with something more suitable. You will need to apply your judgement here and should not refuse to accept a particular document simply because you have not seen one like it before. If it looks official, perhaps because it bears an official crest and the applicant’s photograph, then generally you can accept it.(This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Miscellaneous and unacceptable documents Quite often you will be presented with documentation in support of an applicant’s identity that is simply unacceptable. Photocopies of utility bills and other documents are generally unacceptable, as described above. Bus or Train season tickets are also unacceptable forms of identity as are any other documents that may have been issued without the applicant having been required to satisfy the issuer as to their identity. You should never accept a self-addressed envelope or personal letter as identification. However, if presented with a letter on the headed paper of a hotel which shows the address that the applicant is currently using, you may have to accept this as proof of that address where the applicant clearly has no other suitable documentation. Nationality and the right to work in the UK You should not, under any circumstances, become involved in any issues surrounding nationality right of entry to the UK, or right to work in the UK. We have no authority to ask questions about these matters which are for the Home Office to determine. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42170
CISR42170 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: NINO | CISR42600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Newly Self Employed customers registering for Self Assessment and CIS All newly self-employed customers registering for Self Assessment (SA) only, or SA and CIS, must establish their identity before their registration for SA can be processed. The proper way to do this is for the person to provide a verifiable NINO. By verifiable NINO, we mean one that can be traced on HMRC computer systems. Even if the applicant offers sight of a National Insurance card, you must still check the NINO on HMRC computer systems (however see below where the customer has only recently attended an Evidence of Identity interview with DWP). A CIS application form CIS301 (Individual), CIS302 (Individual) and CIS304 (Partner) is therefore not complete without a NINO. This should be entered by the applicant in the relevant section of the form. The NINO on the application form will need to be verified as part of the authentication process. This is to ensure that the identity of the applicant has been established before the application is processed. If the NINO is verified as belonging to the applicant on HMRC systems the operator can proceed with registration. The applicant may be able to obtain their NINO from any of the following: National Insurance card - RD3 Form RD1138/CA1019 - quarterly bill for Class 2 National Insurance Contributions Form CA2347 - Bank mandate for Class 2 NIC deductions Form RD170 - deficiency notice Any other official document or letter on headed note-paper issued from the Benefits Agency or HMRC National Insurance Contributions Office (NICO). Where the applicant is not already registered for Self-Assessment and does not hold a United Kingdom National Insurance Number (NINO), then the applicant should be advised to apply for one by telephoning the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) on 0845 600 0643. As part of this process, they will be asked by DWP to attend an Evidence of Identity interview. Once the customer has their United Kingdom NINO, the SA/CIS registration process can proceed as normal. Where the customer claims not to be liable to UK National Insurance see the guidance below. Customers who already have a Self-Assessment record open but do not have a verifiable UK NINO Where the applicant is already registered for Self-Assessment but does not hold a UK NINO, then the applicant should be advised to apply for one by telephoning the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) on 0845 600 0643. As part of this process, they will be asked by DWP to attend an Evidence of Identity interview. Once the customer has their UK NINO, the SA/CIS registration process can proceed as normal. Where the customer claims not to be liable to UK National Insurance see the guidance below. Customers who have recently attended an Evidence of Identity interview with DWP If the customer has recently attended a DWP Evidence of Identity interview and now wants to register for SA and CIS and produces a letter from DWP with their NINO on it, you must accept this without question. The completed forms with the NINO will be sent to the NICO CIS team who will check NIRS2 to see if the NINO is now registered on HMRC systems, if it is not they are able to verify the NINO on DWP systems using ADD, and then proceed with registration for SA and CIS as normal. Alternative process for customers claiming not to be liable for UK National Insurance However, you should be aware that not every customer will need a UK NINO because, in a very few cases, they do not have to pay UK National Insurance. Therefore, if anyone seeking registration for SA and CIS, tells you that they are not liable for National Insurance in the UK, you should make an appointment for them at a UK venue for them to prove their identity. Customers from the Isle of Man Residents of the Isle of Man should have been issued with a NINO commencing with the letters ‘MA’. These NINOs are valid in the UK and the guidance at NIM39620 refers. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42180
CISR42180 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: setting the 'Inhibit output' signal Setting the ‘Inhibit Output’ signal When a customer dies the CIS system automatically ‘inhibits’ the output of CIS Correspondence. In so doing, an ‘inhibit output’ signal will be set on the CIS record. However, there may be occasions when you will need to set the signal manually. For example, a customer has no fixed abode or in a complaint case. Before you consider setting the signal manually, be sure to check whether or not an agent is authorised to receive correspondence. If so, is it still appropriate to inhibit output? If it is and to set the signal go to CIS [Main menu], select [Update Customer] and check the ‘inhibit output’ box in the ‘Registration Details’ window. Remember, once the signal is set, no automatic CIS correspondence will be issued. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42190
CISR42190 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Registration of subcontractors by PT Operations where payments have already been made to the subcontractor or company subcontractor within CIS As the guidance at CISR42050 and CISR42060 and CISR42070 explains, the registration process for individuals, partnerships and companies is carried out by PT Operations. When completing the paper print and post only registration forms, the applicant is asked on the form whether they have already been paid as a subcontractor since 6 April 2007. If they have, the applicant is asked to mark the appropriate box on the form. When completing registration, PT Operations will use the function ‘Unmatched Verifications’ to search for any contractor(s) who may have attempted to verify the subcontractor prior to their CIS registration. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Where no associated contractors are found using the ‘Unmatched Verification’ function, PT Operations will send a letter to the subcontractor asking for details of whom they have been paid by and for what periods. The letter warns that if no response is received, the subcontractor may not be given full credit for all of the CIS deductions that have been made from their payments. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Once the ‘Correct Error on Return’ function has been completed this action will force the payment details for the subcontractor on the contractor’s return across to the ‘payment details’ window on the subcontractor’s recently registered record. This will mean that the subcontractor’s record will then have a complete list of all the payments made to them together with any deductions made from those payments. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42200
CISR42200 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Registration for CIS - problem cases You will occasionally come across cases where it is not possible to register the subcontractor for CIS even though the parent system (such as Self-Assessment) shows a record that is open already in existence. These cases can fall into the following categories. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Bankruptcy cases Where a sole trader has been made bankrupt and they are continuing to trade, a new Self Assessment (SA) record will be required ( See SAM106000 ). Occasionally, the new Unique Taxpayer Reference (UTR) for the subcontractor will not be recognised on the Citizens Identification Framework (CID) and this will prevent registration for CIS. This will mean that if the contractor tries to verify the subcontractor using the new UTR they will be asked to apply the ‘unmatched’ rate of deduction of 30%. Dormant cases Where the SA Record is ‘Dormant’ perhaps because the subcontractor has recently recommenced self-employment after a period working on PAYE, or following a period of unemployment. Written requests to register for CIS Written registration requets are not accepted. Application forms are available for completion and submission online via GOV.UK. This is the quickest and most secure way to deal with applications. The type of form depends on the type of applicant. Application forms are also available to print and post. See What you must do as a Construction Industry Scheme (CIS) subcontractor: Overview - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk) Other Registration problems If you come across any other Registration problems where it is not possible to register the subcontractor for CIS, even though the parent record is already in existence and it is open, you should take the action as described under ‘Bankruptcy cases’. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Note : under no circumstances should the customer have deductions made at 30% by their contractor(s) for any length of time where deductions at either 20% or gross payment status are applicable for the subcontractor. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr42600
CISR42600 - Register and maintain subcontractor: the registration process: contents CISR42610 Introduction CISR42620 Register sole trader for Payment Under Deduction CISR42630 Register sole trader for Gross Payment CISR42640 Register partnership for Payment Under Deduction CISR42650 Register partnership for Gross Payment CISR42660 Register company for Payment Under Deduction CISR42670 Register company for Gross Payment CISR42680 Register trust for Payment Under Deduction CISR42690 Register trust for Gross Payment CISR42700 Register unincorporated body for Payment Under Deduction CISR42710 Register unincorporated body for Gross Payment CISR42720 Foreign Nationals/Concerns applying for gross payment status CISR42730 Joint concerns / ventures CISR42740 Registration of subcontractors by NICO or the CT CIS Centre Hull where payments have already been made to the subcontractor or company subcontractor within CIS CISR42750 Registration for CIS - problem cases Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43600
CISR43600 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: contents CISR43610 Changing Tax Treatment from gross to net following compliance failures by the subcontractor CISR43620 Changing Tax Treatment from gross to net following a request from the subcontractor CISR43630 Changing a subcontractor's Tax Treatment from net to gross CISR43640 No Compliance History cases CISR43650 Ad hoc' Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) CISR43660 Information only' Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) CISR43670 Applications involving joint concerns or change in type of concern CISR43680 Finalise incomplete Tax Treatment - Sole traders CISR43690 Finalise incomplete Tax Treatment - Partnerships CISR43700 Finalise incomplete Tax Treatment - Companies, Unincorporated bodies and Trusts CISR43710 Voluntary Arrangement cases Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43010
CISR43010 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: introduction This paragraph serves as an introductory overview of the examination of registration applications for net payment status and gross payment status. This section covers the process from submission of the registration application, applying the tests for gross payment status and the outcome of the application, and the granting of gross or net payment status. Subjects dealt with here are: The order of applying the tests (greater detail is covered in the separate sections for each of the tests Applications involving joint concerns Applications involving changes in the type of the concerns See the information and action guide menus for detail on any of these topics. All applicants are initially granted ‘Net’ payment status. Gross payment status is only confirmed after the successful outcome of the Turnover test, Business test and Compliance test. Applications for net or gross payment status can be made online by completing and submitting a form via GOV.UK what you must do as a CIS subcontractor or by completing paper forms HM Revenue & Customs have made a commitment to process all gross payment applications as soon as possible after receipt. If gross payment status is granted to a subcontractor they will then be subject to an annual compliance test known as the Scheduled (or Ongoing) review to make sure that the subcontractor is continuing to meet all of their obligations under the Taxes Acts. Detailed guidance about the Scheduled review can be found at CISR49000 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43020
CISR43020 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: applying the tests for gross payment status | CISR43600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The tests for gross payment status are covered elsewhere in the guidance as follows turnover test (see CISR44000 onwards) business test (see CISR45000 onwards) compliance test (see CISR46000 onwards) Each of these tests must be passed in order to qualify for gross payment status. This part of the guidance gives an overview of the handling of a gross payment application through the entire process. Turnover test In order to obtain gross payment status an applicant must satisfy certain conditions relating to the ‘Net Construction Turnover’ of the business. The turnover limits are defined in the legislation. If a case fails the turnover test the system will provide specific reasons for failure and automatically advise the applicant of the reasons why the application has failed the turnover test. Business Test To satisfy the business test, an applicant must provide details of a current bank account through which their business is conducted and confirm that they are carrying out construction operations in the UK. The system will use ‘Bank Wizard’ to check the validity of the information provided, for example, it will check if the sort code is valid and allocated to a UK bank branch. It does not check that the bank account details belong to the applicant. The system is not able to verify the following accounts: building society accounts foreign bank accounts. old bank accounts recently opened accounts Compliance test The Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) checks the compliance history of a subcontractor (See CISR43070 ). If the test result fails the CIS system provides the reasons for failure. FA04/S64 specifies the conditions that must be met in order to pass the compliance test. These conditions are subject to certain tolerances defined in SI2005/2045 reg 32. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43030
CISR43030 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: changing a subcontractor's tax treatment | CISR43600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| A subcontractor’s tax treatment may be: changed from gross to net changed from net to gross The changes may be as a result of: a request from the subcontractor an appeal by the subcontractor against the tax treatment given a scheduled review by HMRC (see CISR49000 ) a compliance officer changing the tax treatment if there is evidence of fraud Whenever a change is made to a subcontractor’s tax treatment under FA04/s66(1), a notification is issued to the subcontractor (form CIS308) advising them of the intention to change their tax treatment. Before removing gross tax treatment from a subcontractor under FA04/s66(1), because of compliance failures, you must firstly consider whether the subcontractor had a ‘reasonable excuse’ ( CISR81020 ) for the failures identified, the guidance at CISR49000 goes into the action required in more detail. Where suspected fraud is involved and gross tax treatment is being withdrawn with immediate effect under FA04/s66(3), the subcontractor is not automatically notified. In these cases you will need to manually write to the subcontractor telling them the reason(s) why gross payment status has been withdrawn. Where gross payment status is withdrawn or HMRC have refused to grant gross payment status, the subcontractor is given 30 days to appeal against this decision. See CISR48000 for more information on how to deal with Tax Treatment appeals. A subcontractor will not be able to apply to change from net to gross payment if a ‘‘live’’ exclusion period has not ended. An ‘‘exclusion period’’ will begin on the day that gross payment status was removed, and will continue for a twelve month period from this date. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43040
CISR43040 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: changing a subcontractor's tax treatment from gross to net | CISR43600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| A subcontractor’s tax treatment may be changed from gross to net: by a Higher officer during an examination of a taxpayer’s compliance record by a Higher officer as part of an examination of the turnover test figures as a result of an unsuccessful appeal by the subcontractor against the tax treatment change by a compliance officer where there is evidence of fraud. Any changes made to the subcontractor’s tax treatment must be recorded on the “contact page” with the name and PID number of the officer making the change and the reasons for the change. Tax treatment changed as a result of a scheduled review Before removing gross tax treatment from a subcontractor under FA04/s66(1) because of compliance failures, you must firstly consider whether the subcontractor had a ‘reasonable excuse’ ( CISR81020 ) for the failures identified, the guidance at CISR49000 goes into the action required in more detail. The legislation at FA04/s66(2) states that where gross payment registration is cancelled, there must be a ‘prescribed period’ of 90 days from the date of issue of the notice to the effective date of cancellation. The notice (CIS308 or manual notice) must provide the subcontractor with the reasons for the cancellation and must also tell them that they will be registered for ‘Net’ payment status. Top of page Tax treatment changed where there is evidence of fraud An officer of HM Revenue & Customs may at any time make a determination under FA04/s66(3) cancelling a person’s registration for gross payment if they have reasonable grounds to suspect that the person - was registered for gross payment on the basis of false information has fraudulently made an incorrect return or provided incorrect information whether as a contractor or a subcontractor. has knowingly failed to comply (whether as a contractor or subcontractor) with the CIS provisions. Where a determination is made under FA04/s66(3) for the reasons detailed above the cancellation takes effect immediately. The Suspected Fraud Identification Process (SFIP) must be used for all cases in which you suspect fraud. To access the Suspected Fraud Identification Process please go to the CCG Guidance Hub, select your business area, then select ‘Suspected Fraud Identification Process’ from the Process Guides drop down menu. Where gross tax treatment is withdrawn with immediate effect you must manually write to the subcontractor to tell them that their tax treatment is being changed from gross to net, the date from which the change will take effect, and reasons why gross tax treatment is being withdrawn, as no output is automatically issued by CISR to the subcontractor following the use of function [Change TT] in these circumstances. Top of page Appeals A subcontractor can appeal against the notice (CIS308) withdrawing gross payment status and this must be made to HMRC within 30 days of the notice. If the Decision Maker decides not to uphold the appeal, the subcontractor has the right to ask for an internal review of the decision, or to notify the appeal to the tribunal. Any appeal made should be handled by the section that withdrew the gross tax treatment. However if the subcontractor later requests an internal review this will be handled by someone outside of the direct management chain of the Decision Maker. If the subcontractor later appeals to the tribunal, the appeal papers will be requested by the Appeals Unit who will be responsible for presenting the appeal before the tribunal. See CISR48000 for more information on how to deal with Tax Treatment appeals. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43050
CISR43050 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: changing a subcontractor's tax treatment from net to gross | CISR43600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| A subcontractor’s tax treatment may be changed from ‘Net’ to ‘Gross’: where the subcontractor successfully passed the turnover test, business test and compliance test. as the result of a successful appeal by the subcontractor against ‘Net’ payment status. When a subcontractor’s tax treatment changes from net to gross a notification of the change (CIS316) is immediately sent to all Contractor Schemes who have either paid or verified the subcontractor during the current and two previous complete income tax years. A subcontractor will not be able to apply to change from net to gross payment if a ‘‘live’’ exclusion period has not ended. An ‘‘exclusion period’’ will begin on the day that gross payment status was removed, and will continue for a twelve month period from this date. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43060
CISR43060 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: No Compliance History cases ‘No History’ cases with a National Insurance Number (NINO) Where a new subcontractor registers for gross tax treatment, PT Operations will run the Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) see CISR43070 . However where the system indicates ''No SA Returns due'' for a test participant, (sole trader, partner, director or shareholder) this application will be passed to the ''Complete TTQT Manually'' worklist for a manual TTQT check to be undertaken. All ‘Incomplete’ work items will be handled as follows; When working these you will need to use the ''PAYE Service'' or ''TBS'' to trace an employment record for the applicant to check their previous employment history, you should also issue a CIS309 to the applicant asking them to supply evidence to you of the turnover, shown on their registration form. Form CIS309 is available from the SEES package entitled ‘Emp Comp & Const Ind’. The form asks the applicant to provide evidence to confirm the turnover shown on the application form and can include the following: bank statements paid invoices paid cheques books and accounts of the business The applicant is given a period of 21 days in which to respond to the CIS309. If the subcontractor is unwilling to put their evidence through the post, then provided that they make an appointment with a mobile adviser at a UK venue of their choice, they will be able to take the evidence to the adviser who will give them a receipt for the evidence produced. The mobile adviser must make a note of the evidence supplied by the subcontractor using the function ‘Record Contact’ (see CISR90270 ), and then immediately pass that evidence to the section that requested sight of this. If the evidence of turnover is produced and you are satisfied that this backs up the figures shown on the application, and all other areas of the application are also satisfactory, you will need to finalise the unconfirmed TTQT result as a ‘pass’ by using the ‘Manage TTQT’ function (see the table below). If however no reply is received to the CIS309 and the TTQT has an ‘Unconfirmed’ status, you should finalise the TTQT as a fail result, again using the function ‘Manage TTQT’. When using this function you should select the ‘miscellaneous’ fail reason, and then enter in ‘free-format’ a fail reason of ‘Evidence of Turnover not provided as requested’, this text will then appear on the CIS308 when it is issued to the applicant. The applicant will then remain on net payment status. If the applicant subsequently provides the turnover evidence shortly after the CIS308 has been issued and that evidence is satisfactory, then you should run an ‘Information only’ TTQT (see CISR43160 ), and if this finds that the applicant passes the Compliance Test, then you should change the tax treatment from net to gross using the function ‘Change TT’ (see CISR43630 ). Note : when requesting an ‘Information only’ TTQT, bear in mind that the ‘qualifying period’ will be up to the date the original application for gross payment status was made. Your ‘Information only’ TTQT will however look back 12 months from the date of your request, you should therefore ensure that had the TTQT been run for the 12 months up to the date of the original application that the TTQT result would have been the same. Top of page ‘No History’ cases without a National Insurance Number (NINO) Where a new subcontractor registers for gross tax treatment, an appointment will be made for the applicant to meet with a mobile adviser for an Identity check. The applicant will be asked to take with them evidence to support their turnover as shown on their registration form, and evidence to show that they pass the business test. If the applicant has entered the United Kingdom from abroad they should also be asked to produce evidence to show that they have met all of their taxation obligations in the emigrating country (translated into English) in order to prove that they will also pass the Compliance Test. More information can be found regarding these registration applications in the Action Guide at CISR43640 . Once this information has been obtained and the evidence seen, the registration form should be passed to PT Operations for processing, where you are satisfied with the evidence that the applicant has produced to you which confirms that the Business, Turnover and Compliance Tests are passed. Where you have doubt that any one of these Tests have been passed, you should follow the guidance in the Action Guide at CISR43640 . Where the subcontractor meets with a mobile adviser you should refer to CISR42150 for detailed information to enable you to carry out the Identity checks required. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43070
CISR43070 - Introduction The Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) is an automated process that checks the compliance history of an applicant subcontractor applying for gross payment status within the ''qualifying period'' (twelve months) prior to the date the TTQT is run. The first TTQT after being granted GPS will be run after 6 months, following that it will be run annually for all subcontractors holding gross payment, this process is known as the Scheduled (or Ongoing) Review (see further below) TTQT will check other computer systems such as Self Assessment (SA) and Corporation Tax (COTAX) to check that tax returns and payments have been made on time. Where the subcontractor also acts as a contractor or employer, TTQT will also check that all tax / NICs deducted from their own subcontractors and employees has also been paid to HMRC on time, and finally TTQT will also look to see if the subcontractor has filed all their monthly contractor returns (CIS300) on time. TTQT will look at each ''participant'' connected with the application. So for a sole trader there will only be one participant, for a partnership there will be more than one participant, and for a company there could be one or more participants including the directors or shareholders in the company. For a company, the compliance of the directors or shareholders is only checked at the initial application for gross payment status and not annually thereafter. TTQT will also only look at payments and obligations that have become due during the ''qualifying period'', any obligation that has not yet become due or that fell due before the start date of the ‘qualifying period’ will be ignored for the purposes of the test. From 27 October 2008, TTQT also automatically applies a de-minimis limit of £99.99 against any liability either paid late or still outstanding within the ‘qualifying period’. This limit is applied against any or all of the following payments: Payments due under PAYE in respect of TAX CIS deductions VAT This de minimis limit can be applied any number of times against each of the above obligations, and where TTQT now finds any liability that is £99.99 or less instead of failing TTQT, this obligation will now pass. In addition, from 23 November 2009 any failures in respect of late payment of interest charges or outstanding interest charges for both Corporation Tax and Self Assessment will also be ignored for the purposes of TTQT. Where each participant has met all their taxation obligations on time, TTQT will score a ''Pass'' and gross payment status can be allocated to (or retained by) the subcontractor. Where the applicant or a participant has not met one or more of their tax obligations TTQT will score the application as a ''Fail'', and an ‘Unconfirmed’ TTQT entry will be generated on to the following work lists; Scheduled (Ongoing) Review From October 2007 TTQT also runs annually against those subcontractors who already hold gross payment status on CIS, this process is known as the ''Scheduled Review''. Before a Scheduled review TTQT can be finalised as a ‘fail’ for a subcontractor who already holds gross payment status you will need to ascertain from the subcontractor the reasons why the failure(s) identified occurred. This is so that you can establish whether or not the subcontractor had a ‘reasonable excuse’ for the failure(s) which will allow you to decide whether or not gross payment status should be withdrawn from them, see CISR49000 for more guidance about this. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43080
CISR43080 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) - Employer tax debts The Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) will as part of its review, test whether the subcontractor where they act as an employer/contractor made their payments/returns on time. Up until 5 April 2014, TTQT will continue to check BROCS for details of payments of Tax/NICs paid over to HMRC by the subcontractor where they also act as an employer/contractor. From 6 April 2014, TTQT will check the new Enterprise Tax Management Platform (ETMP) only for details of payments of Tax/NICs paid over to HMRC by the subcontractor where they also act as an employer/contractor. When testing whether payments have been made on time, some special situations may arise as detailed below. Employer/contractor obligations falling due in the 2013/14 tax year From 6 April 2013 all payments made by an employer/contractor will be held on ETMP only. TTQT looks back for obligations falling due in the last 12 months (the ‘qualifying period’), as we move into the 2013/14 tax year TTQT will still be looking for obligations relating to employer/contractor payments on BROCS only it will not be able to see the obligations that have become due from 19 April 2013 (22 April 2013 if the employer/contractor pays electronically) that are now recorded on ETMP. TTQT will therefore (after checking all other areas) produce an ‘Incomplete’ TTQT result. You will therefore need to check ETMP manually using ‘ETMP View’ that the employer/contractor obligations falling due from 19 April 2013 (and that also fall within the TTQT ‘qualifying period’) have been made on time. Where you identify late payments of employer/contractor obligations on ETMP these should be added to the TTQT results found using the guidance in CISR43600 to do so. Months 12 and 13 employer payments due Up until 23 November 2009, any TTQT run either at Registration, scheduled review, ‘Ad-hoc’ or ‘Information only’, would have identified any late or outstanding payments as an employer or contractor for all months (including months 12 and 13) during the ‘qualifying period’. From 23 November 2009 until 5 April 2014, TTQT ignored any failures at months 12 and 13 that have been paid by 19 or 22 July for the purposes of determining whether the TTQT is a ‘Pass’ or a ‘Fail’. This is because TTQT cannot automatically identify the correct due date of any payments made in respect of Class 1A NIC which falls due by 19 or 22 July each year (depending on the method of payment). From 6 April 2014, TTQT will be testing for all employer/contractor payments due for months 1 to 12 (inclusive) although TTQT will continue not to test for payments of Class 1A NIC which falls due by 19 or 22 July (Month 13 payments). However, the fact that TTQT now ignores these obligations does not mean, for the purposes of the Compliance Test, that these obligations cannot be brought into account in any manual Compliance Test undertaken. Any late payments identified manually at months 12 and 13 in respect of PAYE paid later than 19 or 22 April may still be taken into consideration. Quarterly payment cases When TTQT runs and the system checks the payments made by the subcontractor in their capacity as a contractor/employer who pays quarterly, the system will only check for payments made on time in months 3, 6, 9 and 12. Where the contractor has made quarterly payments but incorrectly used payslips intended for other months such as 1, 2, 3 and 4 (for example), the automated TTQT will fail as there are no payments in months 6, 9, 12 and Month 3 appears to be paid late. When carrying out a manual TTQT check or as a result of an appeal submitted by the subcontractor, if it is obvious that this is what has happened you may amend the automated TTQT result where you are satisfied that it should have passed, or uphold any appeal made in favour of the subcontractor. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43090
CISR43090 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) - ‘Time to pay’ arrangements Self-Assessment liabilities Where a 'time to pay' (TTP) arrangement has been agreed between an individual participant and the Business Payments Support Service (BPSS) or direct with Debt Management & Banking (DMB) regarding a Self-Assessment (SA) liability that is about to become due, if the arrangement has a start date before the due date and is within the 'qualifying period' TTQT will not treat the SA debt as becoming due until the end date of the TTP arrangement. Therefore any liability covered by the arrangement cannot be treated as outstanding or paid late unless it is after the end date for the TTP arrangement. TTQT will therefore only 'Fail' such cases where any of the liability covered by the TTP remains outstanding after the 'end date' for any TTP arrangement. If however, the TTP arrangement has a start date which commences after the SA liability has already become due, then TTQT will fail the application provided the due date falls within the ‘qualifying period’, as the liability was not paid by the due date. Corporation Tax/Employer and Contractor liabilities For corporation tax liabilities and employer/contractor liabilities whilst the subcontractor may have entered into an agreed TTP arrangement with HMRC before the liabilities become due for payment, TTQT will not be able to identify these cases from COTAX or BROCS/ETMP. Therefore if a subcontractor says that they entered into a TTP arrangement for either; Corporation tax liabilities shown on COTAX Employer/Contractor liabilities shown on BROCS / ETMP and the subcontractor kept to the terms of that TTP agreement and you can confirm that was the case, then this aspect of the TTQT will ‘pass’. Failure to keep to a TTP arrangement If an agreement to enter into a TTP arrangement is rejected by Debt Management & Banking (DMB) or the subcontractor did not keep to the terms of the TTP, then TTQT will run in the normal manner, and all late payments identified in the qualifying period should be taken into consideration in deciding whether the ‘Compliance Test’ is passed or not. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43100
CISR43100 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) - Claims of problems with ‘Cash-flow’ | CISR43600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| HMRC have, in the past, only accepted cash-flow problems as a reasonable excuse ( CISR81020 ) where the subcontractor could clearly demonstrate that this was due to the unexpected failure of a business that owed money to the subcontractor, or sudden difficulty in arranging finance, where the general background of the subcontractor was one of good compliance. In considering such claims you should refer to the detailed guidance at CISR81080 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43110
CISR43110 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) - Group payment arrangements | CISR43600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Where a company within a group has entered into a group payment arrangement (see the COTAX Manual) and holds gross payment status under CIS, TTQT will not be able to identify late payments of Corporation Tax made by that company within the group to HMRC. Where you become aware that such a company has failed to make its payments of Corporation Tax on time, then you will need to use the function ‘Change TT’ to change the payment status of the company from gross to net (see CISR43610 ). Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43120
CISR43120 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) - Manual TTQT check | CISR43600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| When carrying out a manual TTQT check you should also bear in mind that a return or payment may have become due just before the date of your compliance check. If the manual TTQT fails when taking into account the late submission of this latest return or payment, but would have passed otherwise you should apply a tolerance of: 28 days for the most recent late payment or SA / COTAX return and 38 days for the most recent and penultimate contractors monthly return (CIS300) This will allow time for the payment or return to be processed and logged on to the system. These tolerances must not be applied to any other obligations of the subcontractor that fall due earlier in the qualifying period. Please see examples 1 to 4 below: Example 1 A manual TTQT check is carried out on 7 March 2009, the check reveals that the only compliance failures the subcontractor has are as follows: Paper CIS300 to 5 July 2008 submitted 30 July 2008 (less than 28 days late) Paper CIS300 to 5 October 2008 submitted 28 October 2008 (less than 28 days late) Paper CIS300 to 5 January 2009 due by 19 February 2009 not yet logged. Although TTQT has identified 3 late contractor returns for the applicant, as the last contractor return has not been logged and 38 days has not yet elapsed since the due date for the return, the TTQT may be treated as a ‘‘Pass’’. Example 2 A manual TTQT check is carried out on 25th February 2009, the check reveals that the only compliance failures the subcontractor has are as follows: Paper CIS300 to 5 July 2008 submitted 30 July 2008 (less than 28 days late) Paper CIS300 to 5 October 2008 submitted 28 October 2008 (less than 28 days late) Paper CIS300 to 5 January 2009 due by 19 January 2009 not yet logged. Paper CIS300 to 5 February 2009 due by 19 February 2009 not yet logged Although TTQT has identified 4 late contractor returns for the applicant, as the last return has not been logged and 38 days has not yet elapsed since the due date for the return, this return may be ignored. The return for January 2009 is now 37 days late, but as this again falls within the 38 day tolerance for a contractor return. This TTQT may be treated as a ‘‘Pass’’ Example 3 A manual TTQT check is carried out on 7 March 2009, the check reveals that the only compliance failures the subcontractor has are as follows: Paper CIS300 to 5 July 2008 submitted 15 August 2008 (more than 28 days late) Although TTQT has identified only one late contractor return for the applicant, as it is more than 28 days late, the TTQT must be treated as a ‘‘Fail’’. Example 4 A manual TTQT check is carried out on 7 March 2009, the check reveals that the only compliance failures the subcontractor has are as follows: Self Assessment 1 Payment on account due 31 January 2009 paid 26 February 2009. Self Assessment 2 Payment on account due 31 July 2009 paid 2 September 2009. Although TTQT has identified two late SA payments for the applicant, the first is not more than 28 days late, but the second one is more than 28 days late. The TTQT must be treated as a ‘‘Fail’’. Also from October 2007, it is possible to run an ‘‘Information only’’ TTQT. This will not alter the payment status of the subcontractor, and no output will be generated externally from it. However, this will give you some idea whether or not a subcontractor would be likely to lose gross payment status, if a TTQT was to be run now. This may be useful to Employer Compliance officers who are undertaking an employer compliance review of the subcontractor. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43130
CISR43130 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) - Self Assessment re-instated payments on account (POA) Because of the way information is presented in Self-Assessment (SA), there is no way at present for TTQT to identify re-instated payments on account (POA). These can occur where POA are reduced following a claim received from the customer on form SA303 (see SAM1030) but are then wholly (or partly) re-instated following capture of the Self assessment return for the year. The due date for these re-instated POA becomes 31st January following the year of assessment, but in order to calculate interest correctly SA still uses the original due dates for the POA. Where the TTQT failures includes re-instated POA’s they will fail the compliance test and the case will be generated on to the ‘Complete SA TTQT manually’ worklist (or ‘Complete CT TTQT manually’ where the failure is in respect of a director or shareholder of a company) as an ‘Unconfirmed’ TTQT. Where you are presented with an ‘Unconfirmed’ TTQT and the failures identified include re-instated POAs that are paid prior to 31st January following the year of assessment you may make that specific failure reason ‘inactive’ instead of a ‘fail’. If this failure reason is the only one that has been identified by TTQT, that will mean that the TTQT will now ‘pass’. If however there are other ‘failure’ reasons identified then you will need to examine each of these to make sure the failure reason is valid and take the action as set out in the following guidance; Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43140
CISR43140 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Gross payment or payment under deduction: Ad-hoc Tax treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) | CISR43600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| From 15 October 2007, there is a facility to run a ‘‘one off’’ or what is called an ‘‘ad-hoc’’ Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT). This can be requested where you felt that the subcontractor was not meeting their compliance obligations and could include the following situations, note however that this list is not exhaustive; The subcontractor has compliance failures but the next scheduled review date of the subcontractor’s Tax treatment is not for sometime yet. The subcontractor has been declared bankrupt or insolvent A partner in a partnership has been refused gross payment status following TTQT being run, but there are other partners within the same partnership already holding gross payment status. An ‘‘ad-hoc’’ TTQT may now be requested in respect of those other partners in advance of the normal scheduled review date. A partner in a partnership has been refused gross payment status following TTQT being run. That same partner also has another Registration (for example, as a sole trader) that also holds gross payment status. An ‘‘ad-hoc’’ TTQT may now be requested in respect of the other registration for which gross payment status is now held in advance of the normal scheduled review date. An individual or company subcontractor loses gross payment status following an annual scheduled review of their Tax Treatment. Where the individual or company is also a member of a partnership holding gross payment status, an ‘‘ad-hoc’’ TTQT may now be requested in respect of the partnership registration for which gross payment status is also held in advance of the normal scheduled review date. Where the subcontractor also acts as a contractor, and they have submitted monthly returns CIS300 late on four or more occasions within the last 12 months. Where the subcontractor also acts as a contractor, and they have failed to submit one monthly return CIS300 at all within the last 12 months. The return in question would be where a period of inactivity had not been set, where a penalty inhibition was also not set, and where no penalty appeal in respect of that monthly return had been made by the contractor. Where the result of the ‘‘ad-hoc’’ TTQT results is a ‘‘failure’’ this will be generated on to an ‘Unconfirmed’ TTQT worklist. Before finalising the TTQT you will need to follow the procedure set out at CISR49600 first to establish if the subcontractor had a ‘reasonable excuse’ for the failures identified. Once the ‘unconfirmed’ TTQT is finalised CISR will notify the subcontractor of their loss of gross payment status by the issue of a CIS308 with a 90 day notice period of when this change of tax treatment will take effect. An ‘‘ad-hoc’’ TTQT cannot be run however where any of the following circumstances are present There is an outstanding TTQT request (except where an ‘‘information only’’ TTQT has been requested, see CISR43160 ). There is an ‘‘unconfirmed’’ TTQT result present. There is an outstanding Tax Treatment appeal open for the subcontractor, or for another partner in the same partnership. Where a Tax Treatment appeal has been recently closed, and the Tax Treatment is already scheduled to change from Gross to Net payment. A Previous TTQT failure resulted in a Tax Treatment appeal being received, which was subsequently upheld. Requesting a TTQT now could cause the period for the original TTQT failure to be re-examined. The subcontractor does not have Gross payment status already. There is less than 10 days until the next annual TTQT scheduled review is due, or the scheduled review date is in the past. There is less than 90 days following the date that an open Tax Treatment Appeal was settled for the subcontractor, or for another partner in the same partnership. Where the subcontractor is deceased. Where CISR identifies any of these circumstances a warning message will be displayed to the operator indicating that the request for the ‘‘Ad-hoc’’ TTQT cannot proceed. Where the tax treatment has been recently changed following a previous TTQT, then CISR will display a warning to the user advising that the tax treatment was recently changed following a request made by the subcontractor, however CISR will allow the user to proceed with the ‘‘ad hoc’’ TTQT request. Another warning message will also display where you ask for an ‘‘ad-hoc’’ TTQT, but by making this request, will result in a Tax Treatment failure being tested again when that failure has already been tested before on a previous TTQT. In this case CISR will not allow the user to proceed with the ‘‘ad-hoc’’ TTQT request. Instead a Manual TTQT (See CISR43120 ) will need to be carried out, and if that results in a ‘‘failure’’ then the function ‘‘Change TT’’ (See CISR43630 ) should be used to change the tax treatment of the subcontractor, but you must do this only after you have followed the procedure set out at CISR49600 first, to establish if the subcontractor had a ‘reasonable excuse’ for the failures identified. When you have requested an ‘‘ad-hoc’’ TTQT that results in a ‘‘pass’’, the date of the next tax treatment scheduled review will not alter where gross payment status has been retained by the subcontractor. This is so even where the normal tax treatment scheduled review date is only a short time in the future. Where you request an ‘‘ad-hoc’’ TTQT and that compliance test results in a confirmed ‘‘failure’’ (after exploring whether the subcontractor has a ‘reasonable excuse’ for the failures identified), if following a successful appeal made by the subcontractor gross payment status is restored, the date of the next tax treatment scheduled review (See CISR49000 ) will change to 12 months after the date of the last failure reason CISR identified (See Example 1 below). Where however this would result in a next scheduled review date that is less than 90 days in the future or is in the past then CISR will automatically re-set the next scheduled review date for 90 days into the future from the date the appeal was determined. Example 1 A subcontractor registers for gross payment status on 12 April 2008; the date set for the next tax treatment scheduled review is 12 March 2009. An ‘‘ad-hoc’’ TTQT is run on 12 February 2009 and results in a confirmed TTQT fail, the most recent failure reason being the late payment of the Self-Assessment Balancing charge for 2007/2008 due on 31 January 2009. The subcontractor makes an appeal on the grounds that they had a ‘‘reasonable excuse’’ and the appeal is upheld by a tribunal. Instead of the next scheduled review date being 12 February 2010, it is now set for 31 January 2010, being the 12 month anniversary of the most recent failure reason. Example 2 A subcontractor registers for gross payment status on 12 April 2008; the date set for the next tax treatment scheduled review is 12 March 2009. An ‘‘ad-hoc’’ TTQT is requested on 12 February 2009 and results in a pass, the only failure being found is the late payment (by one day) of the Self-Assessment Balancing charge for 2007/2008 due on 31 January 2009. Instead of the next tax treatment scheduled review date now being 12 January 2010, the next tax treatment scheduled review date of 12 March 2009 remains undisturbed. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43150
CISR43150 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: System ‘Ad-hoc’ Tax treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) From 6 April 2008 CIS recognises where four consecutive monthly contractors returns have been not been received by the due date from a contractor who also acts as a subcontractor and holds gross payment status, and where the Scheduled Review (see CISR49000 ) is not yet due. CIS will initiate a process which will be run once a month to identify these and run a system ‘ad-hoc’ TTQT to highlight these and any other failures within the twelve month ‘qualifying period’, and remove gross payment status from the subcontractor. A contractor record will not be examined for a system ‘ad-hoc’ TTQT until at least one month has passed since the fourth consecutive monthly return penalty has been issued; this is to take into account the possibility of any appeal being made by the contractor against the monthly return penalties issued The system ‘ad-hoc’ TTQT will be triggered where CIS identifies four late consecutive contractor returns within the period, which will be the current month minus 5 to the current month minus 2. The date of the system ‘ad hoc’ TTQT will be on the 7 day of each calendar month. Example 1 On the 7th November 2010 CIS will look at the contractor returns for June 2010 to September 2010, the penalty for the October 2010 contractors return will not be included as the 30 day appeal period following the issue of the penalty will not yet have expired. Where a first penalty has been issued in respect of four consecutive contractor returns the system ‘ad-hoc’ TTQT will run for the subcontractor except where any of the following circumstances are present: The subcontractor, as a contractor, has been ‘Inactive’ in any of the months to be assessed. The subcontractor is due to change to net tax treatment already in the next 90 days. There is an unresolved appeal against the withdrawal of gross payment tax treatment. There is an unresolved tax treatment appeal for other registering partners who would be a ‘test participant in a TTQT. The subcontractor or registered partner (who would be a test participant in a TTQT) is deceased. The subcontractor is a Trust. The system ‘ad-hoc’ run date is earlier than the earliest date on which a Compliance Test can be run. (This is to prevent the system ‘ad-hoc’ TTQT covering the same ‘qualifying period’ that has already been subject to an appeal upheld in favour of the subcontractor). The way that the system ‘ad-hoc’ TTQT will work is that CIS will look for the first penalty that has been issued in respect consecutive contractor’s returns, and will count each first penalty issued in respect of that return. The system ‘ad-hoc’ TTQT will however ignore the following: Where at the time of the system ‘ad-hoc’ TTQT, there is a penalty inhibition in respect of any first penalty relating to a particular monthly return. Where however the penalty inhibition is later lifted, and the penalty still stands then this contractor’s monthly return will be counted provided that the return falls within the current month minus 5. Where any of the penalties issued in respect of any of the four late returns under examination have been vacated. Where there is an open, or upheld penalty appeal in respect of a particular contractor’s monthly return that falls within the current month minus 5. Example 2 The run of late contractor returns from June 2010 was interrupted by the setting of Inactivity signal for the September 2010 contractor return, and so a new run commences from the October 2010 contractor return. The system ‘ad-hoc’ TTQT will also work in the same way that the normal ‘ad-hoc’ TTQT operates, so that: Where the subcontractor type is that of an ‘Unincorporated body’ the TTQT will always come out as ‘Incomplete’. The system ‘ad-hoc’ TTQT will need to be completed manually (see CISR43690 on how to do this). Where the subcontractor type is that of a partnership, the system ‘ad-hoc’ TTQT will check the partnership and all the partners of the partnership including the registering partner(s). Where the subcontractor type is that of a company, the system ‘ad-hoc’ TTQT will check the company only and not the directors or shareholders relating to that company. Finally once the system ‘ad-hoc’ TTQT has run and the ‘Unconfirmed’ TTQT result has been confirmed as a ‘fail’ (after exploring whether the subcontractor has a ‘reasonable excuse’ for the failures identified), the subcontractor will be notified by CIS308 regarding the loss of their gross tax treatment, and the date for this change will be 90 days after the date of issue of the CIS308. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43160
CISR43160 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Gross payment or payment under deduction: ''Information only'' Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) | CISR43600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| There is a facility to run an ‘‘Information only’’ Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT). This can be requested for any reason but could include the following situations: Where you felt that the subcontractor was not meeting their compliance obligations or you were conducting an employer compliance review. Where either the Business Test or the Turnover Test is failed, and you want to know what the result of any Compliance Test would have been. This is so that where any appeal against the Business Test or Turnover Test failure is made by the applicant; you may inform them of any Compliance failures also found. A Tax Treatment appeal has been made and some time has passed since the automated TTQT was run. The Decision Maker, Review Officer (where an internal review is requested) or the Tribunal Caseworker (at their discretion) may request an ‘‘Information only’’ TTQT to indicate whether the subcontractor has been meeting their compliance obligations since the date the automated TTQT was run. This will be particularly useful where the appeal is going forward to a Tribunal hearing and you wish to demonstrate whether the ‘reason to expect’ test (see CISR46100 ) is passed. This ‘‘Information only’’ TTQT has no effect on the tax treatment of the subcontractor, and no output is generated by CIS to the subcontractor. The result of your request for an ‘‘Information only’’ TTQT should be visible within View Customer (See CISR90150 ) within 24 hours of your request. Note: that an ‘‘Information only’’ TTQT can be requested where the subcontractor has either gross or net tax treatment currently. An ‘‘Information only’’ TTQT cannot be run where any of the following circumstances are present There is already an outstanding TTQT request. There is already an ‘‘unconfirmed’’ TTQT result present. Where one of these two circumstances is present, then CIS will display a message informing the user that an ‘‘Information only’’ TTQT cannot be requested at the current time. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43170
CISR43170 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: notification of refusal Applicants who fail in their gross payment status application are notified in writing on form CIS308 of the reasons why the application has failed. If an application fails because it is unable to meet the requirements of the ‘Turnover test’ or the ‘Business test’ a CIS308 will be issued detailing the reasons why the application has failed to meet the requirements of these two tests. The Compliance Test will only be run once an application has met the requirements of both the ‘Turnover test’ and the ‘Business Test’. However, where the application for gross payment is from a company or a partner in a partnership, the CIS308 will detail only the failings of the company or of the partnership. It will not detail the failings of any individual director or shareholder or in the case of a partnership the failings of a particular partner. Instead a message which says the following will appear on the CIS308: Company ''For the company to be registered for gross payment, all directors and shareholders must have complied with their tax obligations. Unfortunately the company has failed this test, so we have to refuse gross payment status''. Partnership ''For an individual to be registered for gross payment as a partner in a firm, all the partners in the partnership must have complied with their tax obligations. If one of the partners in the partnership fails the Compliance Test then unfortunately the partnership has failed this test, so we have to refuse gross payment status''. The reason for the CIS308 displaying this information only, is so that there is no disclosure regarding the failures of a particular director or shareholder or of another partner in a partnership to a third party without the express authority of the individual concerned. Once a CIS325 (director or shareholder) or a CIS324 (partner) has been completed by the individual then compliance failures made by them may then be disclosed as necessary. However if you have already received the necessary authority on form CIS324 or CIS325 (as appropriate) before the ‘Unconfirmed’ TTQT is finalised, you may add the TTQT Test participants failures to the failures already identified for inclusion on the CIS308 in accordance with the authority now held. The applicant has the right of appeal against the refusal to grant gross payment status. Any subsequent appeal hearing should deal with all the reasons for the application failing. A subcontractor that has failed in their application for gross payment status is automatically granted net payment status. Where a subcontractor’s initial application for gross tax treatment has failed they are free to re-apply for gross tax treatment at any point in time, however, they will still have to pass the business, turnover and compliance tests. Therefore as long as there are still compliance failures within the 12 months leading up to the fresh application, they will not be able to pass the compliance test. If on the other hand, gross payment status has been removed, for example, following a Scheduled Review, the subcontractor is unable to re-apply for gross tax treatment until 12 months after the date net payment status commenced, this is known as an ‘exclusion period’ . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43180
CISR43180 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: turnover test failures | CISR43600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| In order to be granted gross payment status the applicant has to prove that the business meets the requirements of the turnover test. An individual must be able to illustrate a net construction turnover of at least £30,000 in the 12 months preceding the date of application. For a partnership or company application this figure is multiplied by the number of partners or ‘relevant persons’ in the 12 month period preceding the application. Alternatively a business that has a net construction turnover of £200,000 or more meets the requirements of the alternative turnover test irrespective of the number of partners or ‘relevant persons’. See CISR44000 onwards for more details on turnover tests. The ‘Net Construction Turnover’ figure is calculated by taking the Gross UK Construction Turnover less the direct cost of material used to earn that turnover. The Gross UK Construction Turnover should be exclusive of VAT. An applicant that has failed to meet the requirements of the turnover test will be advised on form CIS308. The form will detail the figures used for the turnover test calculation as shown on the registration form and will provide details of the level of Net Construction turnover needed to satisfy the turnover test. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43190
CISR43190 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: joint concerns / ventures / limited liability partnerships. | CISR43600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Partnerships are normally made up of individuals. Applications for gross payment status by more complex partnerships should be dealt with by Higher or Senior officers. The following are examples of complex joint applications: Individual partner A and company B Ltd in partnership (a mixed partnership) Company C and company D in a joint venture Company E and company F in a legal partnership Mixed partnerships Partnerships that feature a mixture of individuals and companies should complete application form CIS304, partnerships that feature companies only should also complete application form CIS304. Only one partner can complete the form and that person is known as the ‘registering partner’. A mixed partnership can be made up of individuals and one or more companies or sometimes just two or more companies where the participants are operating under a deed of partnership or as an unincorporated Joint Venture. Turnover test In many cases, a mixed partnership will use the standard turnover test. The multiple partnership turnover threshold is worked out as follows: the number of individual partners excluding the company multiplied by the minimum turnover amount Plus the number of relevant persons appropriate to the company multiplied by the minimum turnover amount The alternative turnover test applies where a partnership has a turnover in excess of £100,000 during the 12-month period preceding the date of application. The threshold is set and is not related to the number of partners. Example Where a mixed partnership is using the standard turnover test you need to confirm the number of relevant persons. Companies that are wholly owned by companies that already hold gross payment status are not required to pass the turnover test. Business and compliance tests Where the partnership passes the turnover test, the normal business test and compliance test rules apply. The compliance test applies to each member of the partnership. Guidance on applying the business test can be found at CISR45000 and the compliance test at CISR46000 onwards. Top of page Joint ventures and partnerships of companies Partnerships, unincorporated joint ventures or consortia that feature only companies should apply on form CIS304 as far as possible. The CIS304 should be signed by the company secretary of the senior member company in the partnership. In the case of a 50/50 arrangement, either company secretary may sign. Only where the Joint Venture is itself a corporate body, should the application form CIS305 be used. For more detailed guidance on processing registration applications from Joint Ventures see the guidance at CISR42100 and CISR42730 . Turnover test Again it is likely that this type of partnership will use the standard turnover test. Where the partnership has a turnover in excess of £100,000 during the 12-month period preceding the date of application the alternative threshold will apply. Business test and compliance test A mixed partnership involving companies must pass both the business test and compliance test before gross payment status can be granted. Guidance on applying the Business test can be found at CISR45000 onwards and the Compliance test at CISR46000 onwards. Guidance on processing a registration application from a Joint Venture can be found at CISR42100 . Top of page Limited Liability Partnerships These are new entities created by the Limited Liability Partnerships Act 2000 where the partners have limited liability in the event of the failure of the business. For the purposes of CIS and the application to register with net or gross payment status they are treated in exactly the same way as ‘normal’ partnerships, using form CIS304 to make an application to register. They can also have partners who are themselves limited companies. Top of page Associations Sometimes companies work in association on a single project but there is no ‘business’ standing apart from their own respective businesses, neither do they share profits and losses. This situation is described in the Business Income Manual at BIM72010 as not constituting a partnership. There is no suggestion here that these loose associations represent Unincorporated Associations, these are dealt with separately in the Company Tax Manual at CTM41305. These associations are sometimes called a ‘JANE’ which is an acronym for ‘Joint Association No Entity’. The contractor will need to verify and pay separately each of the parties involved in the JANE for the works that they each carry out in fulfilling the construction contract. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43200
CISR43200 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: change in the type of concern In the guidance that follows we use the term concern to mean a business entity, so that it includes sole trader subcontractors, partnerships and companies. Where the CIS Registration Team at NICEO receives an application involving a change in the type of concern (for example, where the members of the partnership has changed, or where previously registered sole traders have now formed a partnership), these will be referred (with a covering memo) to the CIS Centre, Newcastle, to arrange action is taken on Self Assessment (SA) to ensure that the SA record is updated, see the Self Assessment Manual (SAM) at SAM101000. Once the SA record has been updated the CIS Centre, Newcastle should then continue to process the Registration application from the partnership for either net or gross payment status, and these should not be referred back to the CIS Team at NICEO. No change in type Where the number of partners within an existing partnership, or the directors or shareholders in an existing company changes then there is no change here in the type of concern. New partners wishing to apply for gross payment status on behalf of a partnership will be subject to the compliance test. Where new non-compliant directors or shareholders are appointed to an existing company holding gross payment status you should request an ad-hoc TTQT in order to highlight the failures of the new appointees (you may have to identify the failures for these individuals manually), you will however first need to make a direction under FA04/s64(5) (see CISR46110 ). Change in type of concern Separate information panels give more detail on each of the following specific changes in type of concern. General information applicable to all cases can be found in the rest of this panel. Use the links below to view specific details for each case. In any of the above cases, a change of concern of a different type is created which will need to re-register either for gross or net payment status. The applicant should inform HMRC of the details of the change and make an application to re-register for either gross or net payment status. Which turnover test the new concern uses depends on the circumstances of the change in concern. Further information can be found at Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43210
CISR43210 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: sole trader or partnership becoming a company | CISR43600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Where a sole trader or partnership becomes a company the new business must register for CIS and apply for gross payment status before it can be paid without CIS deductions being made. Where the CIS Registration Team at NICEO receives an application involving a change in the type of concern where a previously registered sole trader or partnership have now formed a company, these applications will be referred (with a covering memo) to the CIS Centre, Newcastle, to arrange for action to be taken on Self Assessment (SA) to ensure that the SA record is updated, see the Self Assessment Manual (SAM) at SAM101000. Once the SA and COTAX records have been updated the CIS Centre Newcastle should then continue to process the CIS Registration application from the company for either net or gross payment status, and these should not be referred back to the CIS Registration Team at NICEO. The new company may use the ‘Inherited Receipts’ test based on previous turnover to satisfy the turnover test. There must be true continuity if the new concern is to rely on ‘inherited’ turnover from a previous period of trading. Put simply this means the same people running the same type of business. Turnover test The applicant’s type of concern at the date of application is company, and so the company rules apply. The applicant should use form CIS305 for the turnover test and should supply a covering letter explaining how the ‘relevant persons’ figure is made up. The company is able to use the net construction turnover earned by the sole trader or partnership in the qualifying period to satisfy the requirements of the turnover test. See CISR44190 for more information on ‘Inherited receipts’. Business and compliance tests The applicant must also pass both the business, and compliance tests before gross payment status is granted. The business test is run at the same time as the turnover test is completed; the compliance test is only undertaken when both the turnover test and business test have been passed. The type of concern at the time of the new application is a company; therefore the compliance test will apply to each ‘relevant person’ (director or shareholder). Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43220
CISR43220 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: sole trader becoming a partnership | CISR43600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| This is where a sole trader takes on a new person as a partner, without also taking on another business belonging to the new partner. The type of concern at the time of application is partnership. The new business should complete a form CIS304 (partnership application). The registering partner should sign the application. Where the CIS Registration Team at NICEO receives an application involving a change in the type of concern where a previously registered sole trader has now formed a partnership, these will be referred (with a covering memo) to the CIS Centre, Newcastle, to take action on Self Assessment (SA) to ensure that the SA record is updated, see the Self Assessment Manual (SAM) at SAM101000. Once the SA record has been updated the CIS Centre, Newcastle should then continue to process the Registration application from the partnership for either net or gross payment status, and these should not be referred back to the CIS Registration Team at NICEO. The type of concern at the time of the new application is a partnership. If the business is using the ‘Standard’ turnover test it will have to be able to show that it has earned ‘Net Construction Turnover’ of £30,000 multiplied by the number of partners, in the 12 months preceding the date of application. See CISR44160 for more information on the Standard Turnover Test. Alternatively if the business has earned ‘Net Construction Turnover’ of £200,000 or more in the 12 months preceding the date of application, the business will be able to meet the requirements of the ‘Alternative Turnover Test’. See CISR44170 for more information on the ‘Alternative Turnover Test’. Business test Most applications should be able to pass the Business Test. The partnership is able to use evidence that the sole trader undertook work within the United Kingdom Construction Industry to satisfy this part of the business test. Compliance test As the type of concern is that of partnership, all partners will have to meet the requirements of the compliance test before gross payment status is granted to those partners wishing to register for CIS. Partnership becoming a sole trader(s) Should you encounter the reverse situation, that is, a partnership is dissolved with one partner carrying on the business as a sole trader, or two partners carrying on two separate businesses as sole traders you may need to seek advice about the turnover being used by the sole trader(s) in registering for CIS. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43230
CISR43230 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: two or more sole traders or partnerships merging to form a new partnership | CISR43600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| This is different to the situation described at CISR43220 . In this case two or more existing businesses merge. The new partnership created should be treated as a new business. The new partnership should complete form CIS 304 (partnership application) that should be signed by the registering partner of the new partnership. The new business must apply for gross payment status before it can be paid without deductions being made. SI2005/2045 reg 29 details the evidence that a new business may use to satisfy the requirements of the turnover test, business test and compliance test. Where the CIS Registration Team at NICEO receives an application involving a change in the type of concern where two or more previously registered sole traders or partnerships have now merged to form a new partnership, these will be referred (with a covering memo) to the CIS Centre, Newcastle, to take action on Self Assessment (SA) to ensure that the SA records are updated, see the Self Assessment Manual (SAM) at SAM101000. Once the SA records have been updated the CIS Centre, Newcastle should then continue to process the Registration application from the new partnership for either net or gross payment status, and these should not be referred back to the CIS Registration Team at NICEO. Turnover test The type of concern at the time of the new application is partnership. The new business is able to use evidence of the turnover of the previous businesses in the qualifying period to satisfy the requirements of the turnover test, the qualifying period is the 12 months preceding the date of application. The new business may take the aggregate of the amount of relevant payments received by the previous businesses in relation to carrying on the business during the qualifying period. Top of page Business and compliance tests The new business is able to use evidence that the old partnerships undertook work within the United Kingdom Construction Industry to satisfy the business test. The turnover test and business tests are run first. The compliance test is only undertaken when both the turnover test and business test has been passed. All partners must be able to satisfy the requirements of the compliance test at the date of merger, in order for the new business to pass the compliance test. See CISR44000 onwards for more detail regarding the compliance test. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43240
CISR43240 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: two or more sole traders or partnerships merging to form a new company | CISR43600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| This is different to the situation described at CISR43210 . In this case two or more existing businesses merge. The company created should be treated as a new business. The new company should complete form CIS305 (company application) that should be signed by the company secretary of the new company. The new business must apply for gross payment status before it can be paid without deductions being made. SI2005/2045 reg 29 details the evidence that a new business may use to satisfy the requirements of the turnover test, business test and compliance test. Where the CIS Registration Team at NICEO receives an application involving a change in the type of concern where two or more previously registered sole traders or partnerships have now merged to form a new company, these will be referred (with a covering memo) to the CIS Centre, Newcastle for processing of the application. The CIS Centre, Newcastle may need to arrange for action to be taken on Self Assessment (SA) to ensure that the SA records are updated, see the Self Assessment Manual (SAM) at SAM101000. Once the SA records have been updated the CIS Centre, Newcastle should then continue to process the Registration application from the new company for either net or gross payment status, and these should not be referred back to the CIS Registration Team at NICEO. Turnover test The type of concern at the time of application is a company. The new business is able to use evidence of the turnover of the previous businesses in the qualifying period to satisfy the requirements of the turnover test. The qualifying period is the 12 months preceding the date of application. But the new company will only be able to do this where the trades of the two previous, separate businesses are merged into the trade of the company. Where two separate businesses close down and another separate, unrelated business opens as a company, whose directors are the two previous sole traders, or partners in the two partnerships, it will not be able to use the ‘inherited turnover’ of the former businesses. Business and compliance tests The new business is able to use evidence that the old partnerships undertook work within the United Kingdom Construction Industry to satisfy the business test. The turnover test and business tests are run first. The compliance test is only undertaken when both the turnover test and business test has been passed. All ‘relevant persons’ must be able to satisfy the requirements of the compliance test at the date of merger, in order for the new business to pass the compliance test. See CISR44000 onwards for more detail regarding the compliance test. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43250
CISR43250 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: management take-overs | CISR43600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Where a management take-over (or buy-out) leads to the creation of a new company, the new company should not be allowed to use ‘inherited turnover’ in making its application for gross payment status. It may be possible for the new business to use the ‘transferred receipts test’ to satisfy the turnover test conditions. Regulation 29(2) allows the turnover accrued by one business to be taken into account when dealing with a CIS application for a successor business. Regulation 29(2)(e) allows the use of the turnover earned by the transferor business in the qualifying period to be used by the successor business. See CISR44190 . A condition of this test is that the previous owner would have been able to pass the compliance test at the date of transfer had this been applied. Where a company continues to trade under the same company registration number and UTR after a management buy-out and there is clear evidence of corporate continuity there can be no objection to the company continuing to hold its existing CIS payment status subject to the annual Scheduled Review ( CISR49000 ). This is because in terms of operation of the turnover test, there is no essential difference whether a company changes one or all of its directors, except for the effect of the ‘relevant person’ factor. The critical test for CIS purposes is whether the ‘buy-out’ and any associated transfer of shares represents a change of control and if so whether the new ownership poses a compliance risk sufficient to require you to make a direction under S64(5) to look through the company at the new directors/shareholders compliance records. See CISR46110 for more details on making S64(5) directions. Where non-compliance of the new directors or shareholders is found, you may request an ad-hoc TTQT ( CISR43140 ) for the company, but you may need to identify the failures of the new director(s) or shareholder(s) manually. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43260
CISR43260 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Gross payment or payment under deduction: Companies acting as undisclosed agents Where a company (or person) acts as an agent in setting up construction contracts for another party, they will not generally be the ‘principal’ to that contract either as a contractor or a subcontractor. The word ‘principal’ here means ‘main party to’ or ‘participant’. So in this situation, the contractor and subcontractor will be the principal parties to the contract. In contract law an ‘agent’ has a particular type of relationship with one or both of the principals and may be a ‘disclosed’ or ‘undisclosed’ agent. The Construction Industry Scheme (CIS) applies to payments that discharge the contractual obligations under a contract whether or not the payments flow through the agent. This means that the contractor will need to verify the true subcontractor and complete the monthly return with their details. They cannot complete the return with details of the agent, even if the agent is registered for CIS. It will be very rare and even then only under particular legal circumstances that an agent might also be considered to be acting as a principal in the contracts set up. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) A business may act as a principal in some contracts and as an agent in others. Agents who act as principals for certain contracts may therefore need to be CIS registered. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) CIS applies to the principals to a contract regardless of whether the agent who sets them up is ‘disclosed’ or ‘undisclosed’. It follows that a contractor who has entered into a contract with a subcontractor through an undisclosed agent will not necessarily know the details of the true subcontractor, there is therefore a very real danger of them being in default of their obligations to both verify the subcontractor and make a proper return of the payments made on their monthly return. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44600
CISR44600 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: contents CISR44610 Sole trader CISR44620 Partnership CISR44630 Company CISR44640 Checking gross turnover CISR44650 Checking related materials figures CISR44660 Checking number of partners/relevant persons CISR44670 Penalties Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44010
CISR44010 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: introduction | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The turnover test is one of the statutory tests a subcontractor must pass to gain gross payment status under CIS. This section of the guidance covers applying the test, interaction with the CISR system and related issues. Particular areas covered are how the test is applied at subcontractor registration evidence checks made subsequently (referred to as Post-Acceptance Evidence Checks) explanation’s of the tests and terms used. Note that even though an application fails the turnover test, the other statutory tests, the business and compliance tests, must still be carried out. However, the CISR system will not be able to carry out the Compliance Test automatically once the Turnover Test has failed as the application stops at that point. You will therefore need to request an ‘Information only’ TTQT (see CISR43160 ) to identify whether the Compliance Test is also passed or failed. If an appeal is made against the refusal of gross payment status all relevant grounds of refusal must be identified to the applicant. Although this section focuses on the turnover test, this test is generally carried out at the same time as the business test. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44020
CISR44020 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: applying the turnover test Applying the turnover test involves comparing the applicant subcontractor's net construction turnover in the qualifying period with a threshold figure set in law. The qualifying period is the 12 months preceding the date of application, and the monetary threshold varies according to the class of the business (whether a sole trader, partnership or company), the number of its participants, whether construction work (or supplying labour for such) is its main trading activity The turnover test breaks down into 7 tests referred to in this guidance as the Standard test ( CISR44160 ) the Alternative test ( CISR44170 ) the Subsidiary test ( CISR44180 ) the Inherited receipts test ( CISR44190 ) the Transferred Receipts test ( CISR44200 ) the Prospective Receipts test ( CISR44210 ) the Incidental Receipts test ( CISR44220 ) These tests are described in more detail in the topics devoted to them. Evidence checks Initially, turnover figures taken from an application form (or captured on line) will be accepted for carrying out the turnover test. Where the result is a pass (and the applicant passes the other statutory tests) gross payment status will be granted provisionally. At a later stage a proportion of applicants assigned gross payment status will be required to supply detailed evidence to substantiate the information entered on the application form or captured in a telephone application. See CISR44030 and CISR44040 for more detail on this. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44030
CISR44030 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: preliminary check | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Although any checks to be undertaken on the subcontractor’s turnover figures shown on the application form will be post-acceptance, see CISR44040 that does not mean you should accept any turnover figures that appear incorrect. If the subcontractor’s turnover looks incorrect, you should query the entry with the subcontractor before proceeding with the application form. Examples of this could be where the subcontractor has “inflated” the turnover figure by including the cost of materials bought, and it is clear from the application form and any enclosures that this is what they have done. Or simply, that the subcontractor has made a mathematical error, and the total of their receipts actually come to a lower figure than that which has been recorded on the application form. Where you query the figures on the application form with the subcontractor, and they insist that they are correct, then you have no option but to process the application using the figures as supplied by the subcontractor. Any check done on the application will then feature as part of the post-acceptance checks. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44040
CISR44040 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: post- acceptance evidence checks | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| An application for gross payment status may initially be admitted on the basis of the construction turnover and related materials figures entered on the form/online application. Subsequently, an evidence check is required in order to verify those figures. Compliance Officers can request evidence of turnover at any time, in relation to an ongoing compliance review or a specific Post Acceptance Check. Those with the greater risk are as follows: new businesses that rely on inherited turnover ‘inherited’ or ‘transferred’ from another business to pass the turnover test (see CISR44190 and CISR44200 ) relatively new businesses that have now generated sufficient construction turnover to pass the turnover test, construction businesses of some longstanding whose construction turnover has recently reached the qualifying level established businesses that have recently ventured into the construction industry for the first time. Businesses that have declared a turnover in excess of £30,000 (or the appropriate figure relating to the number of relevant persons) but CISR records show the subcontractor income in the qualifying period does not exceed this figure. What is checked? The aim of the check is to confirm that entries on the application form affecting the turnover test were accurate, or if incorrect, that any error did not give rise to a ‘pass’ where a ‘fail’ would have been the correct outcome. The following must be checked: the ‘Gross amount of payments (not including VAT)’ entry, that is, the applicant’s gross construction turnover the ‘Cost of materials (not including VAT)’ entry, that is, the cost of materials used in carrying out the construction operations for which the contract payments have been made the turnover test ‘multiple’ used is correct in relation to the make-up of the business where this is a partnership or a company. Guidance for each of these can be found in the following topics See ( CISR44050 ) regarding gross turnover figures See ( CISR44060 ) regarding related materials figures See ( CISR44070 ) regarding number of partners/relevant persons How is this checked? If the case is selected under the CIS Gross Payment Post Acceptance Check project, issue an opening letter similar to CIS309 from the Project Document in the E-SIP. The letter asks the applicant to provide evidence to confirm the turnover shown on the application form and can include the following: bank statements paid invoices paid cheques books and accounts of the business Where it is necessary to check the turnover, the Compliance Officer should also consider a further examination of the subcontractor’s overall compliance, if compliance risks ae apparent. In the case of a company subcontractor this will also extend to making directions under Section 64(5)/FA04 where appropriate. The applicant is given a period of 21 days in which to respond to the opening letter. If the evidence of turnover is produced and you are satisfied that the evidence backs up turnover of £30,000 for each ‘relevant person’ or £100,000 where the alternative turnover test is being used (see CISR44170 ), you need take no further action as the applicant will already be on gross payment status. Notify the subcontractor that you are satisfied with the evidence and they are entitled to retain gross payment status subject to ongoing compliance. Where however no response to the opening letter is received and the applicant has a ‘confirmed’ TTQT pass and is already on gross payment status, then you will need to follow the guidance at COG914260. You must also manually write to the subcontractor (on a CIS308) telling them of the fact that their tax treatment is being changed from gross to net, the date from which the change will take effect, and the reasons why gross tax treatment is being withdrawn, as no output is automatically issued by CISR to the subcontractor following the use of function ‘Change TT’. If the applicant subsequently provides the turnover evidence after the CIS308 has been issued (advising the applicant that their gross tax treatment is to be withdrawn), then you should ask the applicant to appeal in writing against that decision. Any appeal made against the withdrawal of gross payment status should be handled by the officer that decided to withdraw gross tax treatment (the decision maker). However if the subcontractor subsequently requests an internal review of the decision this will be handled by someone outside of the direct management chain of the Decision Maker. If the subcontractor then makes an appeal direct to the Tribunal, the appeal papers will be requested by the Appeals Unit who will be responsible for presenting the appeal before the Tribunal. The appeal should be worked in accordance with the instructions starting at CISR48000 . Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44050
CISR44050 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: checking gross turnover | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| This check is carried out as part of the post-acceptance check described in CISR44040 . The check will be made after the application acceptance and assignment of gross payment status. Its object is to verify that the applicant’s actual construction turnover in the qualifying period equalled or exceeded the figure entered as the ‘Gross amount of payments (not including VAT)’ on the application form. Since the qualifying period during which the turnover was generated ends on the day preceding the application date, it is unlikely that an SA or CT return covering that period will be available when the check is carried out. However, other HMRC information resources that can be used for this check are the old CIS System — this will remain accessible for read-only purposes for a period following the introduction of CIS Reform on 6 April 2007. That system may hold details of voucher transactions within the qualifying period the Data Warehouse recording payments posted to the applicant’s record after submission of monthly returns by contractors Where you are unable to verify the construction turnover figure using HMRC Systems you will have to approach the applicant for evidence. Depending on the size and complexity of the applicant’s business, and when the check is carried out, the forms of evidence sought may include: copies of old-style CIS vouchers (where these transactions fall within the qualifying period but it is suspected that the HMRC record is incomplete) copies of CIS deduction statements supplied by contractors while the applicant has held net payment status copies of paid invoices for construction work done for customers who are not contractors under CIS bank statements recording relevant transactions If the applicant is a business of some size and complexity it is unlikely that payments information derived from HMRC Systems or the applicant themselves at a later date will exactly match the figure on the application. Minor discrepancies of no more than 5% below the qualifying threshold may be overlooked. More substantial discrepancies should be investigated and if you conclude that construction receipts were deliberately overstated you should consider: cancelling the applicant’s gross payment status (See CISR43610 ) for guidance about this. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44060
CISR44060 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: checking related materials figures | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| This check is carried out as part of the post-acceptance check described in CISR44040 . The check will be made after the application acceptance and assignment of gross payment status. Its object is to verify that the applicant’s actual materials costs in the qualifying period approximate to the figureentered as the ‘Cost of Materials (not including VAT)’ entry on the application form.Where there is a significant discrepancy, the implication is that materials costs may have been understated in order to increase the business’s apparent net turnover. Since materials costs will be examined at the same time as construction receipts (see CISR44050 ) you can use the same resources to judge the accuracy of the application form entry). These are copies of old-style CIS vouchers (where these transactions fall within the qualifying period but it is suspected that the HMRC record is incomplete) copies of CIS deduction statements supplied by contractors while the applicant has operated under net status copies of paid invoices for construction work done for customers who are not contractors under CIS Minor understatements of materials costs that have the effect of increasing NetTurnover by no more than 5% may be overlooked but more substantial discrepancies should be investigated. If you conclude that materials costs were deliberately understated you should consider: cancelling the applicant’s gross payment status (See CISR43610 ) for guidance about this. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44070
CISR44070 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: checking number of partners / relevant persons | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| For partnership and company applications using the standard turnover test the individual threshold figure must be multiplied by the number of partners or relevant persons.(‘Relevant persons’ are a company’s directors and, if it is ‘close’ its beneficial shareholders. Relevant persons need to be taken into account where a company is a member of a partnership). See CISR44120 for detailed information about how to calculate the number of ‘Relevant persons’ for various different types of Partnership’s and Companies. An applicant might attempt to understate the number of persons involved in the business in order to reduce the multiple turnover threshold, you should check the accuracy of numbers supplied as far as possible using HMRC Systems and information on file such as accounts.Examining the partnership’s SA record, for instance, should allow you to compare known partners with those named on the form CIS304. Where a company is a member, you will need to refer to the Corporation Tax file to determine the number of its directors,whether it is ‘close’ and, if so, how many shareholders need to be taken into account. Overall, you should be looking to check that the number of partners/relevant persons forthe 12 month test period preceding the application date agrees with numbers shown in any SA or COTAX records for the period. Note that the critical number is the maximum number of partners/relevant persons at any one time in the qualifying period. Where there is a discrepancy you should seek an explanation from the applicant. If this is unsatisfactory and you conclude that the number of partners/relevant persons was understated to reduce the qualifying threshold, you should consider: cancelling the applicant’s gross payment status (See CISR43610 ) for guidance about this. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44080
CISR44080 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: penalties for false figures | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| A subcontractor entity (sole trader, partnership or Limited Company) must provide certain information when applying to be registered for payment under deduction or gross payment.S72 FA2004 provides for a penalty not exceeding £3,000 if a false statement is made or a false document is furnishedfor the purposes of becoming registered for payment under deduction or gross payment, and it is false in a material particular and the subcontractor knew it to be false or, made or furnished it recklessly.Registration for Gross Payment Where a subcontractor is registered for gross payment you may discover that a false statement has been made or a false document furnished when considering whether the Business, Turnover and Compliance Tests have been satisfied. COG910030 - Registering for the scheme. You must establish the reasons why false information was provided COG906110 and whether the application for gross payment would have been successful had the correct information been provided.In cases where you establish that the application for gross payment would have been unsuccessful you must consider cancellation of gross payment COG910110 , and consider a penalty under S72 FA2004 (see below).Note you should take this action in relation to false information or documents provided to pass the Business & Turnover tests, as well as any identification of compliance failures. This includes Post Acceptance Checks as detailed at CISR44040 . In cases where you establish that the application for gross payment would still have been successful, you must provide advice to the subcontractor about the importance of providing correct information on any application for registration. Registration for payment under deduction Where a subcontractor is registered for payment under deduction any false statements or documents are likely to be related to the identity of the subcontractor. Where you identify a false statement or document in connection with an application for registration for payment under deduction you must establish the reasons why false information was provided COG906110 and whether the application for payment under deduction would have been successful had the correct information been provided.In cases where you establish that the application for payment under deduction would have been unsuccessful you must consider de-registering the subcontractor consider a penalty under S72 FA2004 (see below).In cases where you establish that the registration for payment under deduction would still have been successful, you must provide advice to the subcontractor about the importance of providing correct information on any application for registration. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) COG904570(This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) S72 FA2004 Penalty The legislation allows for a penalty not exceeding £3,000. Where it is not possible to locate the legal entity, for example in the case of a missing trader with no presence at the business address, or an insolvent business, from April 2021 it is now possible to charge the penalty to another person. The scope of Section 72 Finance Act 2004 penalties also applies to individuals or companies who are able to exercise influence or control over a person who is registering for the CIS; this will include agents, directors, company secretaries, or anyone HMRC believes is in a position to exercise influence and control over the business and/or the person making the CIS registration. Such persons will be liable to a penalty in two circumstances: where they themselves make a false statement or furnish a false document for the purpose of enabling another individual or business to be registered or where they encourage an individual or business to make a false statement or furnish a false document for the purpose of enabling themselves to be registered for the CISYou apply the penalty on a tariff basis according to the number of registration tests for which the subcontractor or another person has submitted or encouraged submission of false information or documents, and the level to which it has co-operated with your request for correct information or documents. The table below details the level of penalty: For example: There is no response to a request to supply evidence of the turnover declared on an application for Gross Payment Status when CISR shows the turnover in the qualifying period did not meet the Turnover Test. The evidence held shows the Turnover Test was not passed, and the refusal to provide evidence to support the application means it is reasonable to conclude that the subcontractor recklessly made the statement regarding the turnover. There has been no co-operation so the penalty is £3,000. The subcontractor responds to a request for evidence by providing invoices which are proven to be falsified (for instance by investigation with the contractor alleged to have been invoiced). The subcontractor made a statement to apply for Gross Payment Status, but knew the documents furnished were false. The subcontractor however did co-operate with our request, it only involves the turnover test, so the penalty is £1,000. A visit to the business address shows it is a shop unrelated to construction & the owner confirms he has traded there for 10 years and has never heard of the subcontractor business you are attempting to visit. You trace a new address & the subcontractor confirms that it deliberately gave a wrong address on the original application for registration and also gave the name of his son as he had been made bankrupt. The false information relates to both the identity and business address, but he has co-operated, so the penalty is £2,000.The example above would also apply to a subcontractor who falsified the business address and turnover figure to obtain Gross Payment Status, but confirmed this was the case. The penalty would be £2,000 as it relates to two tests. Follow the guidance at COG914180 if it is necessary to raise a formal penalty determination. The authorising officer will be the CIS Authorised Technical Officer who makes the decision on cancellation of registration under either net or gross payment status Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44090
CISR44090 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: how the test works | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The turnover test requires the applicant to have ‘net turnover’ exceeding a‘threshold’ during the ‘qualifying period’. These terms are explained in detailin the following information panels. Net Turnover ( CISR44130 ) Threshold ( CISR44100 ) Qualifying period ( CISR44110 ) The size of the threshold depends on the status of the applicant (whether an individual,partner or company). This affects the number of persons that have to be taken into account in calculating the turnover test ‘multiple’ whether the applicant is eligible for the alternative test What is known as the ‘turnover test’ breaks down into 7 tests that areexplained in the following information panels Standard test ( CISR44160 ) Alternative test ( CISR44170 ) Subsidiary test ( CISR44180 ) Inherited receipts test ( CISR44190 ) Transferred Receipts test ( CISR44200 ) Prospective Receipts test ( CISR44210 ) Incidental Receipts test ( CISR44220 ) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44100
CISR44100 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: the threshold explained | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The threshold is the expression used for the level of net construction turnover an applicant for a gross status must demonstrate to pass the turnover test. It varies according to the type of applicant and the test being applied. If the applicant cannot show sufficient turnover as detailed below, they will not pass the“turnover test”, the applicant is not able to apply on a“proportional” basis (in other words there is turnover of £12,000 shown but ina 4 month period only). The current thresholds are shown below. Sole traders Standard test - £30,000 in the 12 month period preceding the date of application. Partnerships Standard test - £30,000 multiplied by the maximum number of the partnership’s participants at any one time in the 12 months preceding the application date. This is known as the ‘multiple partnership turnover threshold’. For the purposes of this test, participants are: partners who are individuals and where a member of the partnership is a company, the number of ‘relevant persons’ relating to that company Alternative test - £100,000 in the 12 month period preceding the date of application. Companies Standard test - £30,000 multiplied by the maximum number of the company’s relevant persons at any one time in the 12 months preceding the application date. This is known as the ‘multiple company turnover threshold’. In this case relevant persons are: directors and where the company is a ‘close’ company, its beneficial shareholders Alternative test - £100,000 in the 12 month period preceding the date of application. Setting the thresholds The provisions specifying these thresholds are as follows ‘individual turnover threshold’ - SI2005/2045 reg 28(1) ‘multiple turnover threshold’ for partnerships – FA04/SCH11/PARA7(2) ‘alternative partnership turnover threshold’ - SI2005/2045 reg 28(2) ‘company multiple turnover threshold’ – FA04/SCH11/PARA11(2)(a) ‘alternative company turnover threshold’ - SI2005/2045 reg 28(3) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44110
CISR44110 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: The test period The turnover 'test period' is uniform for all kinds of applicant. It is the preceding 12 month period ending on the date of application. It is the same as the 'qualifying period' used for the purposes of the compliance test. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44120
CISR44120 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: determining the ‘multiple’ for concerns | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| For partnerships using the standard turnover test, the threshold is dictated by the number of partners involved. For companies, the threshold is determined by the number of ‘relevant persons’. In each case the individual turnover threshold is multiplied by these numbers. For a partnership, the multiple is based on those partners who are individuals and, where one or more companies is a partner, the number of ‘relevant persons’ in the company member or members. For a company, the relevant persons are its directors and where the company is ‘close’, (broadly, where it is controlled by five or fewer persons) its other beneficial shareholders (directors and shareholders in close companies are called ‘relevant persons’ in the legislation) Where a person is both a director and a beneficial shareholder that person is only counted once in the calculation, similarly in a mixed partnership where one of the partners in the partnership is also acting as a director or shareholder in a limited company that also acts as a partner in the same partnership that person is again only counted once. Note that the legislation applies to all shareholders regardless of the rights attaching to the share issue. Where a company has one or more other companies acting as directors, each corporate director is only counted as one relevant person, regardless of the structure of that individual company. See Example 5 below. The following examples 1 and 2 show how the number of partners in partnership cases should be determined.Example 1 Example of determination of number of partners to be considered in applying the turnover test. A partnership has 3 partners, 2 of whom are individuals. The remaining partner is a ‘close’ company that has 2 directors and 2 beneficial shareholders other than the directors. There are thus 4 ‘relevant persons’ in the company. The number of participants remains unchanged throughout the test period. The multiplying factor is therefore 2 individual partners plus 4 ‘relevant persons’ = 6. The individual turnover threshold in force throughout the test period is £30,000. The partnership must show net turnover of £180,000 to meet the threshold for any year in the test period.Example 2 Example of determination of number of partners to be considered in applying the turnover test. A partnership has 3 partners, 2 of whom are individuals. The remaining partner is a ‘close’ company that has 2 directors and 2 beneficial shareholders other than the directors. The company joined the partnership 6 months before the application is submitted. There are thus 4 ‘relevant persons’ in the company. The multiple applicable to the partnership is therefore 2 individual partners plus 4 company relevant persons = 6. The individual threshold is £30 000. The partnership threshold for the 12 months preceding the date of application is 6 x £30,000 = £180,000. The following examples 3 and 4 show how the number of relevant persons in company cases should be determined.Example 3 Example of determination of relevant persons in a company application. A company is a ‘close’ company having 2 directors who hold shares and a further 3 beneficial shareholders. There are no changes in the number of directors and shareholders throughout the test period. Since there are 5 ‘relevant persons’ the multiplier to be applied is 5. The individual turnover threshold in force throughout the test period is £30,000. This company must show turnover of £150,000 to meet or exceed the threshold for any year in the test period.Example 4 Example of determination of number of relevant persons in a company application. A company is a ‘close’ company having 2 directors who hold shares and one other beneficial shareholder at the date of application. Six months before the application was submitted there was a further shareholder who was not also a director. For the first 6 months of the qualifying period there were thus 2 directors and 4 shareholders (including, that is, the directors holding shares). However, where a person is both director and shareholder, they are only counted once in calculating the multiple. The multiple is therefore 2 directors plus 4 shareholders = 6 minus 2 for the dual director/shareholder adjustment = 4. The individual turnover threshold in force throughout the test period is £30,000. This company must show turnover of £120,000 to meet or exceed the threshold for any year in the test period.Example 5 Example of determination of number of relevant persons in a company application. A company has 3 directors that are ‘relevant persons’ and 1 director that is another corporate body. That makes 4 ‘relevant persons’ in this example. Where a director of a company is another corporate body that company is only counted as one relevant person regardless of how many directors it may have itself. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44130
CISR44130 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: net turnover explained Net turnover is arrived at by using the following calculation: These terms are explained below. Gross construction turnover Not all business turnover is eligible to be taken into account in the turnover test.CIS focuses on the construction industry, so the qualifying conditions are aimed at thoseareas of a business’s activity within the construction industry. Gross construction turnover includes any payments under contractsrelating to construction operations. It also includes payments received for supplyinglabour for these activities. The legislation defines construction operations at FA2004\S74(2). Appendix B of thebooklet CIS340 describes the range of operations considered to be within and outside thescope of the Scheme in greater detail. Gross construction turnover can include receipts from work done by an applicant for: someone who is definably a contractor under the CIS Scheme private householders and businesses which are not contractors under the Scheme It does not include VAT or turnover arising from commercial activities not directlyinvolving the carrying out of construction work. Related materials Related materials are the costs incurred on materials used in carrying out contractsthat generate gross construction turnover. For the purposes of the turnover test related materials includes the total cost to theapplicant of the following items: land, building materials and consumable items fuel for plant the actual cost incurred for plant hire any Construction Industry Training Board levy. The following items are not ‘materials’ subsistence expenses fuel for travelling costs of scaffolding purchased by scaffolding subcontractors. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44140
CISR44140 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: advice to unrepresented subcontractors | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Where an un-represented applicant for gross payment status is not satisfied with adviceprovided by notes accompanying the application form the Subcontractor Helpline an appointment can be arranged with a Higher Officer. At this meeting you should explain which tests are available to that subcontractor explain how each available test works (including giving guidance about the test period, what turnover is relevant and calculating the number of partners or relevant persons where appropriate) explain what supporting evidence may be requested (accounts, invoices, other documents as appropriate for each relevant test) explain that the choice of which test to use rests with the subcontractor assist the subcontractor with any calculations However you should not complete the form. You should also not agree the figuressupplied by the subcontractor, unless you see and agree the prime records. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44150
CISR44150 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: legal background to the test The legislation relating to the turnover test is found in the following sections of FA2004 and Statutory Instruments FA2004 The Income Tax (Subcontractors in the Construction Industry) Regulations 2005 Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44160
CISR44160 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: standard test | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| To pass this test the applicant must have net construction turnover equal to or exceeding the threshold in the 12 months preceding the date of application. The threshold depends on the status of the applicant as follows Individual — the threshold is £30,000 Partnership — the threshold is £30,000 multiplied by the sum of the number of partners that are individuals in relation to each company member of the partnership, the number of ‘relevant persons’ associated with that company Company — the threshold is £30,000 multiplied by the number of persons that are relevant persons’ in relation to the company (a company’s ‘relevant persons’ are its directors and, if it is ‘close’, any beneficial owners of shares). Note that where aperson is both a director and a shareholder they are only counted once in the calculation. The turnover achieved by a business cannot be calculated on a pro-rata basis, in other words the applicant cannot say ‘I have earned turnover of £15,000 in the last six months, therefore I pass the turnover test’. Neither can the applicant say that the turnover limit of £30,000 is reduced because they only work part-time, this latter approach was confirmed by the case of HMRC v Smith (EWHC 488/2007). The full monetary amount of £30,000 must be achieved in order for the Turnover test to pass. For most applications net turnover put forward will be turnover earned by the applicant business in its own right. However, some applicants will seek to pass the test on the basis of Inherited receipts (See CISR44190 ) Transferred receipts (See CISR44200 ) If these receipts are acceptable for the turnover test they should be treated as though directly earned by the applicant when applying the Standard test. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44170
CISR44170 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: alternative test | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| To pass this test the applicant must: be a partnership or company and have a net construction turnover equal to or exceeding £100,000 in the 12 months preceding the date of application For most applications net turnover put forward will be turnover earned by the applicant business in its own right. However, some applicants may seek to pass the test on the basis of Inherited receipts (See CISR44190 ) Transferred receipts (See CISR44200 ) If these receipts are acceptable for the turnover test they should be treated as though directly earned by the applicant when applying the rules of the Alternative test. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44180
CISR44180 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: subsidiary company test | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| A subsidiary company whose shares are wholly owned by a parent company (or companies)that holds gross payment status is exempted from the turnover test. This exemption is specified in FA04/SCH11/PARA 11(1)(b) and only applies as betweencompanies. It does not apply to a company whose shares are wholly owned by an individual,partnership or trust that has gross payment status. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44190
CISR44190 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: inherited receipts test | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| For the application there is statutory provision allowing a new applicant for gross payment status to use turnover earned by another business. These provisions are in SI2005/2045 reg 29(2). Change in type of concern Net construction turnover earned in the qualifying period by individuals operating as sole traders that form a partnership to succeed their separate trades an individual that incorporates a partnership that incorporates, the former partners becoming directors/shareholders a company that joins a partnership made up of individuals or companies may be counted in relation to the concern in which they become a participant as partner, director or shareholder. If these receipts are accepted for the turnover test they should be treated as though they were directly earned by the applicant when applying the rules of the Standard or Alternative tests. That a company or partnership is seeking or has secured gross payment status on the basis of inherited turnover will generally emerge where it, or its representatives, seek guidance about this provision at the time of application, or it comes to light in the course of the Post-Acceptance Check that the turnover figure entered on the application form was calculated on this basis In either case you should substantiate the turnover figures by examining the tax records of the business or businesses that are being superseded to satisfy yourself that turnover ‘inherited’ by the successor business is of the right order the superseded business or businesses have ceased trading or are about to do so If you find that in the course of a Post-Acceptance Check the applicant is unable to produce acceptable evidence of prospective turnover satisfying this test you should consider: cancelling the applicant’s gross payment status (See CISR43610 ) for guidance about this (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44200
CISR44200 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: transferred receipts test | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Where an existing construction business is sold as a going concern by its proprietor (the ‘transferor’), the new owner will usually need to register under CIS, if the new owner wishes to apply for gross payment status they will need to pass the statutory tests, including the turnover test. SI2005/2045 reg 29(2)(e) and (3), allows turnover earned by the business while in the hands of the previous owner during the qualifying period to be used by the new owner in support of their application. The new owner may only pass the turnover test on this basis where: the new owner is a company (so this transfer arrangement is not open to an individual or a partnership who acquires a construction business) the turnover transferred, taken together with turnover earned since the change of ownership, exceeds the turnover test threshold applicable to the new owner the old owner would have been able to pass the compliance test at the date of transfer had this been applied This last requirement aims to counter exploitation of this arrangement by non-compliant owners who transfer their businesses to a company successor, for example, in an attempt to retain gross payment status. Typical transfer situations where this arrangement might be beneficial to an applicant are: a retiring sole trader transfers the business to a new company a dissolving partnership transfers its business to a successor company a company being liquidated sells its business to another company (but bear in mind that if that company had tax defaults, it would not now qualify for gross payment status and turnover transfer would not therefore be available to the successor) a management buy-out where the existing company is dissolved, the business being carried on by a newly-incorporated successor company re-organisation of a company group where the construction business of one member is transferred to another company member that is not the direct subsidiary of a parent holding gross payment status If the transferred receipts are accepted for the turnover test they should be treated as though directly earned by the applicant when applying the rules of the Standard or Alternative tests. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44210
CISR44210 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: prospective receipts test | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| A company or partnership applying for gross payment status is to be regarded as passing the turnover test where it is able to show evidence of relevant payments earned on its own account amounting to at least £30,000 and the existence of construction contracts entered into where the aggregate value exceeds £100,000. This test is specified in SI2005/2045 reg 29(2)(d). It is not open to sole traders. That a company or partnership is seeking or has secured gross payment status on this basis will generally emerge where it, or its representatives, seek guidance about this provision at the time of application or it comes to light in the course of the Post-Acceptance Check that the turnover figure entered on the application form was calculated on this basis. In either case you should substantiate the turnover figures by looking for evidence of actual turnover of the kind described in CISR44050 (Checking gross turnover figures) asking for sight of contracts that established the expectation of future turnover at the date of application. If you find that in the course of a Post-Acceptance Check the applicant is unable to produce acceptable evidence of prospective turnover satisfying this test you should consider: cancelling the applicant’s gross payment status (See CISR43610 ) for guidance about this (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44220
CISR44220 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: incidental receipts test | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Under SI2005/2045 reg 31, HMRC can treat a sole trader, partnership or company assatisfying the turnover test if the applicant meets the following conditions the applicant’s business does not mainly consist of carrying out construction operations in the 12 months preceding the date of application the applicant’s total turnover exceeded the relevant turnover threshold for that class of business in the year following the application, the applicant is likely to receive relevant payments in connection with construction operations which are incidental to the main business of the applicant. The intention of this provision is to assist substantial businesses outside themainstream of the construction industry whose contracts are occasionally or incidentallyaffected by CIS. This might happen, for instance, to a manufacturer and supplier ofindustrial plant. If this business occasionally arranges for the installation of itsproducts, these ‘supply and fix’ contracts may be subject to CIS. The overall commercialturnover of the business may far exceed the level required to satisfy the Standard orAlternative turnover tests but because its ‘construction’ turnover is limited, it may failthose tests. This provision provides a basis for such businesses to satisfy the turnovertest. In considering an application on this basis you should satisfy yourself that the applicant’s business is outside the mainstream construction industry its general commercial turnover exceeds the net turnover threshold applicable to that business if it were within the mainstream construction industry there is evidence that the applicant has been caught by CIS in the past, or the applicant provides evidence of a current commitment some aspect of which is within the scope of CIS Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44230
CISR44230 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: averaging rule | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Businesses that have gross payment status will be subject to a periodic scheduled review to ensure that they continue to meet the statutory standards for this status. The review will check whether the business’s tax compliance in the qualifying period (set relative to the scheduled review date) is satisfactory if an application were made at the time of the review, the business would pass the turnover test. You should note, however, that the turnover test carried out for this purpose differs from the test applied to new applicants. In this context the business is considered to have passed the test if its net turnover in the 12 months preceding the scheduled review date exceeds the prescribed threshold for that type of business (in other words, it passes the Standard test), or its average annual net turnover in the 3 years ending with the scheduled review date exceeds the prescribed threshold for that type of business. This averaging rule is provided for in SI2005/2045 reg 29(1)(c)(ii) and is not to be applied to new applicants for gross payment status. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr44240
CISR44240 - Register and maintain subcontractor: turnover test: applications in Welsh | CISR44600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| All applications made in Welsh will be processed at North Wales Area – Porthmadog. Where such an application fails the turnover test, there are special arrangements forissuing a refusal letter in Welsh. You should note the result and issue the appropriaterefusal letter from stocks provided by that office. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr43000
CISR43000 - Register and maintain subcontractor: gross payment or payment under deduction: contents CISR43600 Action guide contents CISR43010 Introduction CISR43020 Applying the tests for gross payment status CISR43030 Changing a subcontractor's Tax Treatment CISR43040 Changing a subcontractor's Tax Treatment from gross to net CISR43050 Changing a subcontractor's Tax Treatment from net to gross CISR43060 No Compliance history cases CISR43070 Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) - Introduction CISR43080 Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) - Employer tax debts CISR43090 Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) - ‘Time to pay’ arrangements CISR43100 Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) - Claims of problems with ‘cash-flow’ CISR43110 Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) - Group payment arrangements CISR43120 Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) - Manual check CISR43130 Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) - Self Assessment re-instated payments on account (POA) CISR43140 Ad hoc' Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) CISR43150 System ‘Ad-hoc’ Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) CISR43160 Information only' Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) CISR43170 Notification of refusal CISR43180 Turnover test failures CISR43190 Joint concerns / ventures CISR43200 Change in type of concern CISR43210 Sole trader or partnership becoming a company CISR43220 Sole trader becoming a partnership CISR43230 Two or more sole traders or partnerships merging to form a new partnership CISR43240 Two or more sole traders or partnerships merging to form a new company CISR43250 Management take-overs CISR43260 Companies acting as undisclosed agents Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr45000
CISR45000 - Register and maintain subcontractor: business test: contents CISR45600 Action guide contents CISR45010 Introduction CISR45020 How is the test carried out? CISR45030 Is the business carried on in the UK? CISR45040 Construction operations CISR45050 Bank or building society cheque account CISR45060 Test failures CISR45070 New partnerships Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr45600
CISR45600 - Register and maintain subcontractor: business test: contents CISR45610 Apply preliminary business test Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr45010
CISR45010 - Register and maintain subcontractor: business test: introduction | CISR45600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| This section of the guidance deals with applying the business test tosubcontractor’s seeking registration for gross payment. Being registered for gross payment entitles a business to receive construction paymentsfree of any CIS deduction. Granting gross payment status to the wrong people can lead toserious tax and NIC losses so it is important that it is only given to genuine businessesthat are directly involved in the construction industry. The purpose of the business test is to establish that the applicant is carrying on agenuine business and that this business includes carrying out construction operations orproviding labour for such operations. The legal requirements The business test for individuals, partnerships and companies is defined in thefollowing provisions for individuals, in FA04/SCH11/PARA2, and SI2005/2045 reg 27 for partnerships, in FA04/SCH11/PARA6, and SI2005/2045 reg 27 for companies, in FA04/SCH11/PARA10, and SI2005/2045 reg 27 These provisions require that the applicant is carrying on a business in the United Kingdom the business consists of, or includes carrying out construction operations, or supplying labour for construction operations the business is, to a substantial extent, carried on by means of an account with a bank Detailed information about these requirements can be found through the information menuabove. Action guides for carrying out the business test can be reached through the actionmenu above. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr45020
CISR45020 - Register and maintain subcontractor: business test: how is the test carried out | CISR45600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The test is carried out in two stages, the first of which assesses whether theinformation provided in the application (whether on a form, or by telephone or Internet)justifies a preliminary decision that the applicant passes the business test. This isreferred to in this guidance as the preliminary business test. The second stage is carried out after the application for gross payment has been admittedand represents a test that verifies the factual information provided in support of theapplication. These tests are described in more detail below. Preliminary business test This involves checking the application to ensure that: the details provided about the bank account are verified by the Bank Wizard the applicant has declared that they are carrying on a business in the UK the applicant has declared that the business consists of, or includes carrying out construction operations, or providing labour for such work the applicant has supplied details of their activities in the qualifying period. Provided that these preliminary checks are satisfactory, the applicant is provisionallytreated as having passed the business test. Note that this decision is made together withdecisions on whether the applicant has passed the turnover and compliance tests. If a subcontractor is asked to attend an Enquiry Centre for an identity check, ContactCentre staff will be asked to check the application in all respects to make sure forexample, that the applicant meets the conditions to pass the business test. Post-acceptance check The Post-Acceptance Check of the business test should be carried out using the application form completed by the applicant, or information gathered by way of a telephone or internet application evidence of business receipts supplied in connection with the turnover test, or recorded on HMRC systems successful matching of Verification Numbers supplied by the applicant when registering accounts and returns in the tax file if there is one — generally, this will only apply to company and partnership cases Note that the Post-Acceptance Check of the business test will generally be carried outat the same time as the turnover test evidence is checked. Clearly, if the applicant hasalready demonstrated receipt of construction payments, there can be no doubt of theexistence of the business and that it includes carrying out construction operations orproviding labour for such. You should note that the object of the check is not merely to establish that the businesstest requirements are satisfied at the date the check is carried out but to confirm thatthose requirements were met when the application was made. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr45030
CISR45030 - Register and maintain subcontractor: business test: Is the business carried on in the UK? | CISR45600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Detailed examination of this aspect of an application will generally occur as part of the Post-Acceptance Check. The subcontractor must be carrying on a business in the United Kingdom. The information given in sections 10 to 14 of form CIS302, sections 2, and 6 to 10 of form CIS304, or sections 2, and 7 to 11 of form CIS305 may be enough to establish this. If, for instance, the form shows that the applicant has a business address in the UK that is obviously not a private dwelling you may accept that they are carrying on a business in the UK. In other cases — for example, a labour-only subcontractor working from home — the application form may not show that an identifiable business set-up has been created. In such cases you should look for other evidence of the existence of the business such as evidence that his private home is the business address evidence of business receipts supplied in connection with the turnover test, or recorded on HMRC systems successful matching of Verification Numbers supplied by the applicant when registering accounts and returns in the tax file if there is one — generally, this will only apply to company and partnership cases the books and accounts of the business See CISR42130 where the applicant is not resident in the UK. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr45040
CISR45040 - Register and maintain subcontractor: business test: construction operations | CISR45600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Detailed examination of this aspect of an application will generally occur as part ofthe post- acceptance check. The applicant must be carrying on a business in the United Kingdom which consists of orincludes carrying out construction operations, or supplying labour to carry out construction operations, or arranging for the supply of labour to carry out construction operations. The information given in sections 10 to 14 of form CIS302, sections 2, and 6 to 10 ofform CIS304, or sections 2, and 7 to 11 of form CIS305 should give some indication as towhether the applicant’s business includes construction operations. By the time thepost-acceptance business test is carried out additional evidence should be available inthe form of evidence of business receipts supplied in connection with the turnover test, or recorded on HMRC systems successful matching of Verification Numbers supplied by the applicant when registering accounts and returns in the tax file if there is one — generally, this will only apply to company and partnership cases. “Construction operations” here means operations as defined in FA2004\s74, forfurther details on what is covered by the term ‘construction operations’ see CISR14000 onwards. Incidental receipts The legal requirement is that the applicant must already be carryingon a business which consists of or includes carrying out construction operations. However,a new feature of the Turnover Test is that an established business not already in receiptof payments for construction work may be treated as passing that test in certaincircumstances (see ‘Incidental receipts test’ — CISR44220 ).Where an applicant is treated as passing the Turnover Test on this basis, you may acceptthat they also satisfy the ‘construction operations’ aspect of the business test. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr45050
CISR45050 - Register and maintain subcontractor: business test: bank or building society cheque account | CISR45600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Detailed examination of this aspect of an application will generally occur as part ofthe post- acceptance check. The subcontractor’s business must be carried out to a substantial extent by use of a bankor building society cheque account. The information given by the applicant in sections 18 - 20 of the application form CIS302 (for individuals) sections 29 - 31 of the application form CIS304 (for partnerships) sections 24 - 26 of the application form CIS305 (for companies) should be enough to establish this. In addition, bank account details will be checkedby [the Bank Wizard] as part of initial application handling. Any application that doesnot show details of such a cheque account will automatically fail the business test. Note that a bank account which is used both for private and business purposes isacceptable under the business test (see Jones v. Lonnen, 54TC714). A business account is normally a current or cheque account, any case in which it appearsthat the account is a deposit account, or an account with the National Savings Bank,should be referred to a Higher Officer. You should not normally accept a savings or deposit account as one by means of which thebusiness is carried on ‘to a substantial extent’ (FA2004/SCH11/PARA 2(b)). The exceptionto this might be where there is a business which does not involve much in the way ofpayments made out. For example, the subcontractor does not purchase materials, does nothave employees and does not engage subcontractors. The Higher Officer may, at their discretion, ask for statements for any account which theapplicant says is a business account. Where you inspect statements, you should beconsidering the question whether the business can be said to be carried on ‘to asubstantial extent’ by means of the account in question. In partnership cases the account must be one through which the partnership business issubstantially conducted and be in the name of the firm. The fact that the legislation and this guidance refers to ‘an account’ does not mean thatthe whole of the business must be conducted by means of a single account. It is quiteacceptable that more than one account is used for business purposes. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr45060
CISR45060 - Register and maintain subcontractor: business test: test failures | CISR45600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Where an application has failed the business test the applicant will have been advised of the reason why the application has failed on form CIS308. Form CIS308 tells the applicant to write to the ‘Appeals Inspector’ if they do not accept the decision. On receipt of the letter of appeal the ‘Appeal Handler’ should record the date the appeal was received. Applications are unlikely to fail by reference to the business test alone, and any gross payment application failures considered on this basis must be agreed by a Higher Officer. Even if the Higher Officer agrees that the applicant fails the business test, it is advisable to prepare a case for possible appeal by looking at the applicant’s compliance record, so the compliance test should also be carried out. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr45070
CISR45070 - Register and maintain subcontractor: business test: new partnerships | CISR45600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Where you come across cases involving new partnerships or changes in the constitutionof an existing partnership, it may be relevant to question whether or not there is agenuine partnership in existence. Such cases should be referred to a Higher Officer forconsideration. Conditions for the acceptance of the existence of a genuine partnership are that the individuals claiming to be in partnership agree between themselves about the business address and the persons considered to be partners, and they appear to have some understanding of the relationship into which they claim to have entered. Where you are not satisfied that a genuine partnership exists you should inform theapplicant partnership accordingly. If, however, you are satisfied that a partnershipexists between some of them though not others, you should say so. You should also say in what capacity (that is, partner or sole trader) you consider that afresh application may be made by each applicant, you may, at your discretion; indicate thelikely outcome of such an application. This guidance applies to new husband and wifepartnerships in the same way as to other partnerships. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr46600
CISR46600 - Register and maintain subcontractor: compliance test: contents CISR46610 Make a s64(5) direction Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr46010
CISR46010 - Register and maintain subcontractor: compliance test: introduction The compliance test is one of the statutory tests a subcontractor must pass to gain gross payment status under CIS. This section of the Guidance covers applying the test, interaction with the CISR system and related issues. Particular areas covered are how the test is applied at subcontractor registration evidence checks made subsequently (referred to as Post-Acceptance Evidence Checks) explanations of the tests and terms used. Note that even though an application fails the compliance test, the other statutory tests, the business and turnover tests, must still be carried out. If an appeal is made against refusal of gross status all relevant grounds for refusal must be identified. Although this section focuses on the compliance test, this test is generally carried out at the same time as the other statutory tests, but the applicant must first pass the business and turnover tests before the compliance test (Tax Treatment Qualifying Test – TTQT) is run. The legal requirements The compliance test is defined in the following provisions for individuals, in FA04/SCH11/PART1/PARA4 for partnerships, in FA04/SCH11/PART2/PARA8 for companies, in FA04/SCH11/PART3/PARA12 The main requirements of the test are that in the qualifying period, the subcontractor must have paid any NICs due, submitted their IT/CT self assessment returns and complied on time - with obligations arising under or in connection with CIS, PAYE regulations and VATA94 where the subcontractor was overseas during the qualifying period, they must show that all similar obligations in the country of residence were complied with, or that there were no such obligations for periods following the date of application, HMRC must have reason to expect that the subcontractor will continue to comply with those obligations on time. The test allows for a limited level of default to be overlooked and this is referred to as the 'compliance tolerance'. See CISR46080 where the compliance tolerance is described in detail. In every case in which an applicant for gross payment registration fails to pass the compliance test, and that failure is outside the compliance tolerance mentioned above, you must refuse registration for gross payment. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr46020
CISR46020 - Register and maintain subcontractor: compliance test: sole traders To satisfy the compliance test, sole trader applicants must have done all the following during the 12 months to the date of application (the qualifying period) sent in any SA return due within that period if the applicant is also a contractor, sent in CIS returns and paid CIS deductions on time if the applicant is VAT registered, sent in VAT returns and paid liabilities on time if the applicant is an employer, paid PAYE and NICs liabilities on time paid their own NICs complied with all requests for accounts or other relevant information any obligation paid late or still outstanding that is £99.99 or less in respect of PAYE, VAT liabilities or CIS deductions will be treated as meeting the compliance test. Paragraphs 4(1)-(5), Part 1, Schedule 11, FA2004, taken together with Regulations 33 - 36 SI2005/2045, require that applicants must show that throughout the 12 month qualifying period they complied with their tax obligations in the UK or elsewhere or had no obligations because they were unemployed or had no obligations because they were in full time education You need to be confident that you know what the subcontractor has been doing in the 12 months to the date of application. You may need to make enquiries about this where there seem to be gaps in the subcontractor’s history. In addition, where a subcontractor had control of a company in the 12 month qualifying period, Paragraph 4(2), Part 1, Schedule 11, FA2004 requires that the company must have complied with its tax obligations during that period. For further detailed information regarding the failures that may or may not be accepted for the purposes of the compliance test see; Finally, there must be 'reason to expect' that the applicant will continue to comply with tax obligations. (See CISR46100 for more details on the 'Reason to expect test'). Reasonable excuse You may ignore certain failures to comply with the above conditions where the applicant had reasonable excuse for the failure to comply, and once the excuse ceased to apply, the applicant then complied with the obligation without unreasonable delay. See CISR81020 for more information about what can be regarded as reasonable excuse. Top of page Timely compliance The legal requirement is not merely that the applicant must have fulfilled tax obligations arising in the 12 month qualifying period preceding the date of application. Those obligations must, in addition, have been fulfilled within the time allowed in law else this requirement is not satisfied and the application fails the compliance test. However, there are certain tolerances specified in the regulations whereby HMRC will overlook a compliance breach. See CISR46080 for more information about these tolerances. See CISR18140 for information on subcontractors with Voluntary arrangements Informal arrangements Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr46030
CISR46030 - Register and maintain subcontractor: compliance test: partnerships To satisfy the compliance test the partnership and all the partners must have done all the following during the 12 months prior to the date of application (the qualifying period) sent in any SA return due within that period if they (the partners or the partnership) are contractors, sent in CIS returns and paid CIS deductions on time if they (the partners or the partnership) are VAT registered, sent in VAT returns and paid liabilities on time if they (the partners or the partnership) are employers, to have paid PAYE and NICs liabilities on time paid their own NICs (if applicable) complied with all requests for accounts or other relevant information any obligation paid late or still outstanding that is £99.99 or less in respect of PAYE, VAT liabilities or CIS deductions during the ‘qualifying period’ will be treated as meeting the compliance test. For further detailed information regarding the failures that may or may not be accepted for the purposes of the compliance test see; Finally, there must be ‘reason to expect’ that the applicant will continue to comply with tax obligations. (See CISR46100 for more details on the ‘Reason to expect’ test). Exception from compliance test Reasonable excuse You may ignore certain failures to comply with the above conditions where The partnership or partner had a ‘reasonable excuse’ for the failure to comply and Once the excuse ceased to apply, the partnership or partner then complied with the obligation without unreasonable delay See CISR81020 for more information about what can be regarded as reasonable excuse. Top of page Timely compliance The legal requirement is not merely that the applicant must have fulfilled tax obligations arising in the 12 month qualifying period preceding the date of application. Those obligations must, in addition, have been fulfilled within the time allowed in law else this requirement is not satisfied and the applicant fails the compliance test. However, there are certain tolerances specified in the regulations whereby HMRC will overlook a compliance breach. See CISR46080 for more information about these tolerances. See CISR18140 for information on partners with Voluntary arrangements Informal arrangements Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr46040
CISR46040 - Register and maintain subcontractor: compliance test: companies To satisfy the compliance test a company applicant and its constituent directors (and beneficial shareholders where the company is ‘close’) must have done all the following on time in the 12 months up to the date of application, this applies even where the director or shareholder resigned or sold their shares at some time during the ‘qualifying period’. sent in any IT/CT SA returns due if they (the company or the directors/shareholders) are a contractor, sent in CIS returns and paid CIS deductions on time if they (the company or the directors/shareholders) are VAT registered, sent in VAT returns and paid liabilities on time if they (the company or the directors/shareholders) are an employer, paid PAYE and NICs liabilities on time paid their own NICs (if applicable) complied with all requests for accounts or other relevant information any obligation paid late or still outstanding that is £99.99 or less in respect of PAYE, VAT liabilities or CIS deductions will be treated as meeting the compliance test complied with obligations under the Companies Act 2006 to provide accounts and returns For further detailed information regarding the failures that may or may not be accepted for the purposes of the compliance test see; Finally, there must be 'reason to expect' that the applicant company will continue to comply with tax obligations in future (see CISR46100 for more details on the 'Reason to expect' test). Exception from compliance test Reasonable excuse You may ignore certain failures to comply with the above conditions where the company applicant had reasonable excuse for the failure to comply, and once the excuse ceased to apply, the company then complied with the obligation without unreasonable delay. See CISR81020 for more information about what can be regarded as reasonable excuse. Top of page Timely compliance The legal requirement is not merely that the applicant must have fulfilled tax obligations arising in the 12 month qualifying period preceding the date of application. Those obligations must, in addition, have been fulfilled within the time allowed in law else this requirement is not satisfied and the applicant fails the compliance test. However, there are certain tolerances specified in the regulations whereby HMRC will overlook a compliance breach. There is more information about these tolerances at CISR46080 . See CISR18140 for information on companies involved in Company Voluntary Arrangements Informal arrangements Top of page Section 64(5), FA2004 In addition to examining the compliance of the company in the qualifying period, FA04/S64(5), allows HMRC to examine the compliance of its principals. If any of the following apply, you may examine the compliance of directors (and shareholders if the company is close) where; a company is seeking registration for gross payment for the first time there has been a change in the control of a company that is registered for gross payment and you wish to determine whether the new interest represents a compliance risk cancellation of a company’s registration for gross payment is being considered under FA04/S66. The application form for companies to apply for gross payment status (CIS305) now includes a reference to the fact that a direction under s64(5)/04 may be made. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr46050
CISR46050 - Register and maintain subcontractor: compliance test: shadow directors | CISR46600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| FA04/S64(7), provides that the word director shall have the same meaning as in ITA03/S67 that is a member of the board of directors or similar body managing the company’s affairs a single director or similar person who manages the company’s affairs a member of the company where the company’s affairs are managed by its members any person in accordance with whose direction the directors (as previously defined) are accustomed to act. You should take particular care when examining applications from new companies, to ensure that those named on the application form as directors, are actually involved in running the company themselves rather than acting under the direction of others, who would themselves be unable to satisfy the gross payment qualifying conditions at FA04/SCH11/PART1/PARA4. You should be on the look out for those directors who apparently have little or no previous experience in the Construction Industry. For example, it is not uncommon to find wives, partners and relatives of individuals known to be operating within the industry to be put forward as directors in this way. These and others may well be continuing to work full time in another capacity. If you suspect that someone else is in fact running the company then you should write to the named directors to establish their knowledge of the trade, their responsibilities generally and in particular in relation to the operation of the Scheme, their responsibility in negotiating with contractors and their knowledge of contracts generally. If you identify others who are running the company’s affairs, and gross payment status would be refused if they applied in their own right, then they should be regarded as directors of the company within the extended definition at ITEPA03/S67(1). A decision taken under Section 67(1) can be defended at any appeal hearing of the refusal of gross payment status (see CISR46090 for more details on Section 64(5) directions). Shareholders who are not directors Section 64(5) also applies to shareholders if the company is close. Compliance failures by holders of negligible interests in the company who are not directors may normally be overlooked. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr46060
CISR46060 - Register and maintain subcontractor: compliance test: main reasons for failure The following is a guide to the main reasons for refusing an application for gross payment status. Non-payment of tax Any of the following means a failed compliance test formal proceedings have been taken to recover unpaid liabilities falling due in the qualifying period, including cases where the tax is eventually written off an investigation has revealed general tax irregularities in respect of obligations imposed in the qualifying period and outstanding liability or payments under an instalment offer have lapsed a PAYE/VAT/CIS remittance is outstanding of £100 or more and the due date was more than 14 days ago outstanding National Insurance contributions Top of page Late payments Any of the following means a failed compliance test any PAYE/VAT/CIS remittance of £100 or more within the preceding 12 months was paid more than 14 days after the due date, or more than 3 remittances of £100 or more are paid late but within 14 days of the due date in the preceeding 12 months any late National Insurance contributions Top of page Returns Any of the following means a failed compliance test Four or more late submissions of the contractor’s monthly return CIS300, or VAT return within the preceding 12 months where the returns were less than 28 days late Any submission of the contractor’s monthly return CIS300, VAT or SA return within the preceding 12 months made later than 28 days after the due date A contractor’s monthly return already due but remaining outstanding at the date of application Any SA return due in the qualifying period but outstanding at the date of application Any Corporation Tax return (CT600) due in the qualifying period but outstanding at the date of application Any VAT return due in the qualifying period but outstanding at the date of application Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr46070
CISR46070 - Register and maintain subcontractor: compliance test: timely compliance | CISR46600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| It is not sufficient for a gross payment applicant merely to have fulfilled all tax obligations falling due in the qualifying period. In general, the applicant must also have fulfilled those obligations in the time allowed by law. Where there are outright compliance failures, that is, unfulfilled tax obligations such as outstanding returns or unpaid tax, you should consider them first in reaching your decision. If there are no outright failures you should then consider whether obligations arising in the qualifying period were met within the time limits allowed. Instances of late compliance identified should be within the compliance tolerance described at CISR46080 otherwise the applicant has failed the test. The requirement for timely compliance is part of the CIS legislation, and must be applied strictly. Subcontractors should only be granted gross payment status where failures are within the compliance tolerance otherwise you must refuse to grant this status. Subcontractors with voluntary arrangements If a formal voluntary arrangement exists and the subcontractor seeks gross payment status you should follow the guidance at CISR46130 in deciding whether the applicant has paid tax on time. However, if you decide to grant gross payment status on that basis, you should advise the subcontractor that if you are notified by the DMB section at any stage that the subcontractor has defaulted on the arrangement you may cancel this status. For applications for gross payment status from individuals or companies in voluntary arrangements you should carry out the turnover test and business test, and the compliance test as far as possible following the guidance at CISR46130 . Top of page Subcontractors with informal arrangements to pay A subcontractor may have entered into an arrangement with the DMB section to allow late payment of their outstanding liabilities. This may occur where a subcontractor has previously been refused gross status and has had cash flow problems as a result of moving to payment under deduction. If an arrangement like this exists and the subcontractor applies for gross status, you should make allowances for it when looking at whether the applicant has paid tax on time. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Top of page Subcontractors claiming ‘cash-flow’ difficulties HMRC have, in the past, only accepted cash-flow problems as a ‘reasonable excuse’ where the subcontractor could clearly demonstrate that this was due to the unexpected failure of one or more of his contractor’s businesses or sudden difficulty in arranging finance, where the general background was one of good compliance. Where a subcontractor has missed a payment or payments, after 1 June 2008, and claims, as a ‘reasonable excuse’, that it was due to cash-flow problems, you can take a more sympathetic view where the subcontractor has some evidence of general financing difficulties, and has had a reasonably good payment record, prior to that date. See CISR81020 for further guidance about ‘reasonable excuse’. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr46080
CISR46080 - Register and maintain subcontractor: compliance test: compliance tolerance The following is a guide to the failures that you may overlook when considering registration for gross payment. Please bear in mind that the only failures that you can disregard for the purposes of the Compliance Test are those set out in Regulation 32 SI2005/2045 and Regulation 2 SI2008/1282. For convenience, these are set out for you again below. The only circumstances where failures outside of those listed in these two regulations can be disregarded is where the applicant can demonstrate that they had a reasonable excuse in relation to a particular failure(s). Further information as to what can constitute a ‘reasonable excuse’ can be found at CISR81020 . Failures you can overlook Three late submissions of the contractor’s monthly return CIS300 - up to 28 days late Three late submissions of VAT returns - up to 28 days late Three late payments of CIS deductions/PAYE/VAT of £100 or more - up to 14 days late (failures allowed for each tax individually) Any late payment of CIS deductions/PAYE/VAT where the amount is under £100 Any Income Tax or Corporation Tax Self Assessment return made not later than 28 days after the due date Note: For those that hold Gross Payment Status at 6 April 2024, failures in VAT compliance occurring before 6 April 2024 should be disregarded for the purposes of the compliance test. What we cannot overlook We cannot overlook the following failures involving obligations falling due in the qualifying period Four or more late submissions of the contractor’s monthly return CIS300, where they were less than 28 days late Four or more late submissions of VAT returns, where they were less than 28 days late Any submission of the contractor’s monthly return, a VAT return or Income Tax Self-Assessment or Corporation Tax Self-Assessment return made later than 28 days after the due date A contractor’s monthly return already due but remaining outstanding at the date of application Four or more late payments of CIS deductions/PAYE/VAT of £100 or more up to 14 days late (failures allowed for each tax individually) Any payment of CIS deductions/PAYE/VAT of £100 or more made later than 14 days after the due date Any payment of VAT/CIS/PAYE deductions already due of £100 or more but remaining unpaid at the date of application Any late payment of National Insurance contributions Any Income Tax SA return due in the qualifying period but outstanding at the date of application Any Corporation Tax return (CT600) due in the qualifying period but outstanding at the date of application Any VAT return due in the qualifying period but outstanding at the date of application Note: For those that hold Gross Payment Status at 6 April 2024, failures in VAT compliance before 6 April 2024 should be disregarded for the purposes of the compliance test. Bear in mind that the failures mentioned above relate to obligations falling due according to CISR in the qualifying period. Outstanding obligations falling due prior to the start of the qualifying period cannot be taken into account directly. You should also bear in mind that a return or payment may have become due just before the date of your compliance check. If the Tax Treatment Qualifying Test (TTQT) fails when taking into account the late submission of this latest return or payment, but would have passed otherwise you should apply a tolerance of: 28 days for the most recent late payment or SA / COTAX return and 38 days for the most recent and penultimate contractors monthly return (CIS300) This will allow time for the payment or return to be processed and logged on to the system. For examples of this see CISR43070 . These tolerances must not be applied to any other obligations of the subcontractor that fall due earlier in the qualifying period. Top of page Refusing gross payment registration You must refuse gross payment registration in every case where compliance failures outside the tolerance limits set out above are identified. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr46090
CISR46090 - Register and maintain subcontractor: compliance test: twelve month qualifying period The compliance test requires that the subcontractor must have complied with certain tax obligations in the 12 months up to the date of application for gross payment status. For further information see CISR46000 Compliance Test You need to be sure that you know what the applicant has been doing in the last 12 months. It is not enough that there are no records for that person in that period and therefore that there have been no recorded failures to comply. If the applicant claims that they have been unemployed or living abroad and so has had no tax obligations in the UK, you should follow these claims up. Absence abroad Where the applicant claims to have been abroad for any part of the 12 months up to the date of application, you should ask for documentary evidence in support of the claim (SI2005/2045 reg 33). Where the applicant has been working abroad, the evidence should come from the revenue authority of that country, stating that the tax obligations of that country have been met by the applicant. Where the applicant was not working in that country, the evidence should come from the relevant immigration authorities or any other government department of that country and should confirm their presence there throughout the stated period. Periods of unemployment Where the applicant claims to have been unemployed for any part of the 12 month period, you should ask for documentary evidence of this from a benefits officer (SI2005/2045 reg35). Where the applicant was not registered unemployed, you should ask for any other evidence they can supply to support their case. You may be able to confirm an applicant's unemployed status by looking at their National Insurance contributions record. You will find more information on how to do this under the information menu. Periods of full time education Where the applicant claims to have been in full time education for any part of the 12 month period, you should ask for documentary evidence of this (SI2005/2045 reg 36). Any period of full-time education or full-time training should be verified as follows Establish the applicant's date of birth. If the period claimed is before their eighteenth birthday, then you can accept the claim. If the period claimed is after their eighteenth birthday and they can supply supporting evidence that they were in full time education or training in the UK, then you can accept the claim. In any other case, you should tell the applicant that the most recent period of full-time education and any periods of full-time training falling within the qualifying period will have to be verified. You should ask for the full name and address of the last school they attended after the age of 16 and of any training establishment; details of the course, that is, starting date, finishing date, course number or other identifying title, the nature of the studies or training and confirmation that the course was full-time; authority for HMRC to approach the school, or training establishment, to obtain verification of the period of full-time education or training; and authority for the school, or training establishment, to disclose the information to HMRC. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr46100
CISR46100 - Register and maintain subcontractor: compliance test: 'reason to expect' test | CISR46600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| You should normally use the ‘reason to expect test’ as an additional reason to refuse gross status where there are already other grounds for refusal. It can be applied where there is no major infringement of the compliance test rules within the 12 months up to the application date but you still consider there to be strong grounds for doubting the applicant’s future compliance. The Board’s policy is that gross payment status should not be issued to subcontractors who have gaps in their tax history or who have seriously neglected their tax obligations in the past. This test should not be used to fail an application wherever the applicant has had a poor compliance record outside the 12 months up to the date of application. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Companies - additional points There must be reason to expect that a company will comply with its obligations and requests in respect of taxation, National Insurance and the Companies Act after the end of the qualifying period. You should consider the company’s compliance in the past the persons who influence the conduct of the company’s affairs - the directors, and where the company is close, the beneficial shareholders - taking account of those individuals’ obligations as set out in FA04/SCH11/PART1/PARA4. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr46110
CISR46110 - Register and maintain subcontractor: compliance test: making a S64(5) direction The legislation allows you to make a FA04/S64(5) direction when a company applicant seeks registration for gross payment there has been a change in the control of a company that is registered for gross payment within the terms of FA04/S65 cancellation of a company’s registration for gross payment is being considered under FA04/S66. The direction allows you to ‘look through’ the company seeking registration (or whose status is being reviewed) at the compliance history of any or all of the directors of the company. In the case of a close company this applies to all beneficial shareholders as well. The application form for companies to apply for gross payment status (CIS305) now includes a reference to the fact that a direction under s64(5)/04 may be made. This does not mean you should always make such a direction. As a broad rule you might make a FA04/S64(5) direction where you have any doubts about HMRC’s entitlement to expect future compliance based on the history of any of the directors. The following are situations where you should make a direction all new companies. an application is being made for gross payment status there is a major change of management or control of a company shortly before registration is sought or whilst the application is being considered. You should pay particular attention to the tax affairs of any new director or beneficial shareholder (where the company is close). (It is possible that those with a poor compliance record may attempt to obtain gross payment status by acquiring a company with a satisfactory history.) In cases where there has been a change of control of the company and the new director’s/beneficial shareholder’s compliance record gives you cause for concern, refer the file to your regional contact of the CIS Technical team (see the CIS Intranet), with a brief report before making a FA04/S64(5) direction. There is an action guide ( CISR46610 ) associated with this document to explain how to make a FA04/S64(5) direction. Once the FA04/S64(5) direction has been made, you can refuse gross payment status on the individual compliance history of any of the company’s directors (or if a close company, any of the beneficial shareholders). Where any one person fails the compliance test, you should not register the company for gross payment status. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr46120
CISR46120 - Register and maintain subcontractor: compliance test: misuse of documents/registration status | CISR46600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| You should refuse gross payment status to anyone who has done any of the following during the 12 months up to the date of application misused an old-style certificate or vouchers made use of a certificate or voucher issued to another person in order to obtain payment without deduction or to reduce their own tax liability made use of any false certificates or vouchers falsely represented themselves as registered for gross payment to a contractor misused gross payment status for a fraudulent purpose. The reason for refusal in these cases are that the subcontractor has not fulfilled their obligations under ICTA88 and TMA70, or given HMRC reason to expect that they will do so in future. If the failure took place more than 12 months before the date of application you should still consider whether the application should be refused. Your reason for refusal would then have to be that there is no reason to expect that the subcontractor will use gross payment status correctly in the future. For more detail on ‘reason to expect’ failures see ( CISR46100 ) under the information menu. Use of expired old-style certificates This guidance applies only to applicants for gross payment status who used old-style CIS vouchers in the qualifying period but after the corresponding certificate had expired. Strictly, the completion of CIS vouchers in connection with an old-style certificate that has passed its expiry date is a misuse. However, you need to distinguish between cases of oversight and cases of intentional misuse or recklessness. You should not refuse gross payment status in cases of innocent oversight. However, you should consider refusal in more serious cases, such as the following vouchers were completed for many payments after the expiry of the certificate vouchers were completed for contractors not known to have made payments while the certificate was valid vouchers were pre-dated to a date before the expiry of the certificate there was evidence that the expiry date of the certificate had been altered. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr46130
CISR46130 - Register and maintain subcontractor: compliance test: voluntary arrangement cases | CISR46600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Gross payment applications from participants in voluntary arrangements present special problems because of the likely compliance failures. However, when processing these applications the Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) will identify for you all of the failures found within the qualifying period and so any TTQT failure in these cases can de dealt with along normal lines whilst, in addition, following the guidance set out below. Before finalising a TTQT including a voluntary arrangement you should obtain details of; when the voluntary arrangement commenced when the voluntary arrangement is due to come to an end whether the applicant has kept to the terms of the voluntary arrangement. This information can be obtained either by obtaining a copy of the relevant pages of the voluntary arrangement showing this information from the HMRC Voluntary Arrangement Service, Worthing, or by telephoning that department and asking for the above information. Cancellation of gross payment status under FA04/s66 in conjunction with FA04/Sch 11(4), (8) and (12) requires that any failure must have occurred during the ‘qualifying period’, (this is the 12 month period leading up to the date of the TTQT). Therefore, you no longer need to establish what the expected dividend will be from the voluntary arrangement, nor the amount of the HMRC debt included within the voluntary arrangement. So where an applicant who has entered into a voluntary arrangement, has kept to the terms of the voluntary arrangement and has complied with all of their obligations under the Taxes Acts falling due within the ‘qualifying period’, then they will be able to retain (or apply) for gross payment status successfully, provided that they also pass the business and turnover tests. The Action guide at CISR43710 sets out how you should work applications for gross payment status in voluntary arrangement cases. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48600
CISR48600 - Register and maintain subcontractor: appeals against refusal or cancellation of gross payment status: contents CISR48610 Business and compliance test refusals CISR48620 Turnover test refusals CISR48630 Logging a Tax Treatment Appeal CISR48640 Re-opening a Tax Treatment Appeal CISR48650 Tax Treatment Appeal made late CISR48660 Upholding a Tax Treatment Appeal CISR48670 Further information required to settle a Tax Treatment Appeal CISR48680 Decision Maker decides that the withdrawal of gross tax treatment was correct CISR48690 Subcontractor takes up the offer of an internal review CISR48700 Tax Treatment Appeal and the Tribunal hearing CISR48710 HMRC action after losing an Appeal when the subcontractor currently holds net payment status CISR48720 Appeal notes Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48010
CISR48010 - Register and maintain subcontractor: appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status: introduction This paragraph serves as an introductory overview of appeals against the refusal of gross payment applications; for deeper coverage use the above links to information or action guides. This section on the conduct of appeals against the refusal of gross payment applications covers the process from queries about refusals or receipt of a notice of appeal to its settlement, either by agreement with the applicant or following determination of the appeal by the tribunal. The subcontractor has the right to accept the decision maker’s opinion of their appeal (ARTG2700), or to take up the offer of review if they do not agree with the decision maker (ARTG4000). Alternatively, the subcontractor can notify the appeal to the tribunal (ARTG8200) so long as an appeal has already been made to HMRC. Tax treatment appeals made by a subcontractor who is an individual or a partner in a partnership, should be handled by NIC&EO Longbenton, and those for companies will be handled also by the CT CIS Centre at Newcastle. Appeals will be handled at these locations up to the point where the appeal is accepted in the subcontractor’s favour, or the decision maker’s opinion is confirmed and the subcontractor accepts that decision, or an internal review is taken up by the subcontractor, or the subcontractor notifies the appeal to the Tribunals Service. There may be more than one reason why an application has failed the tests for gross payment status and the applicant will have been told of all the reasons why the application has failed in the decision letter. The decision letter may include more reasons for cancellation than were identified by TTQT or set out in the CIS308 cancellation notice. When an appeal is to be heard before the tribunal it is important that the hearing deals with all the reasons why the application has failed at the same time. Once an appeal has been logged against a change of Tax Treatment, CISR will suspend any action to change the subcontractor’s tax treatment from gross to net where cancellation is made with notice. Where notifications have already been sent to contractors (this is normally after day 55 of the 90 day notice period) to change the tax treatment to net, CISR automatically changes the Tax Treatment back from net to gross. These contractors will then be advised that Gross Tax Treatment has been re-instated. If the appeal is received and accepted after the 90 day notice period, CISR will again re-instate Gross Tax Treatment and inform the relevant contractors. Where the Tax Treatment had been changed from gross to net without a period of notification (say, following a Compliance Review), then CISR will not change the Tax Treatment status back from net to gross in these circumstances whilst the subcontractor’s Tax Treatment appeal remains open. Appeals not covered in this section Appeals and disputes relating to other work areas within the Construction Industry Scheme are covered in the following sections. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48020
CISR48020 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status: compliance test refusals | CISR48600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| An applicant who is refused gross payment status is required to state the grounds for their appeal within 30 days of the issue of the notice (CIS308) refusing or cancelling gross payment status. It is important in company cases involving refusals based on FA04/S64(5) directions that the names and addresses of the directors whose records form a part of the reason for refusal are informed of any hearing before the tribunal. The payment status of a subcontractor who had registered for CIS prior to 6t h April 2007 cut across from the old CIS scheme to the current CIS scheme and determined whether a subcontractor was entitled to gross payment status, dependent upon what their payment status was at 5t h April 2007. Particular aspects of the conduct of appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status are dealt with in detail in specific information panels available from the information menu. General guidance about the conduct of Tribunal hearings is available in the Appeals, Reviews and Tribunals Guidance (ARTG8200). You should note that all compliance failures falling within the ‘qualifying period’ for the applicant may be brought out in any Appeal Hearing proceedings, and that you are not restricted to those that appear on the notification to the subcontractor (form CIS308). However it is best practice to make sure that all failures are set out in the decision letter as this will form the basis of HMRC’s case before a tribunal. In addition where the appeal is against the withdrawal of gross payment status at the Scheduled Review ( CISR49000 ), you may also wish to check that the applicant also passes the Turnover Test. You can do this by checking the level of turnover shown by the latest return received from the applicant. Where the turnover appears to be insufficient you may issue form CIS309 to the applicant to check the level of construction turnover currently being received. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48030
CISR48030 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status: business and turnover test refusals | CISR48600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The applicant will have received details of the reasons why gross payment status has not been granted on form CIS308. The turnover test and business tests are run for each gross payment application irrespective of whether the turnover test is passed or failed. Form CIS308 will detail all the reasons for either test failing. Where an application has failed because it has not met the requirements for the turnover test the applicant may respond with queries as to how the test has been carried out. Any questions as to the operation of the turnover test rules should be handled by a Higher or Senior officer. It is important to explain the following how the ‘Net Construction Turnover’ has been calculated how the required turnover has been arrived at. If the applicant wants to reapply or wants to appeal, then the officer should give advice on how to proceed. Where the applicant does not have sufficient turnover to pass the turnover test, and no appeal is submitted against that decision, the applicant is not restricted from applying again. Likewise in the same way when an applicant has failed to pass the compliance test, they can also apply at a later date. The main difference in the handling of appeals based on refusals resulting from the turnover test and/or business test is that these applications have not been submitted to the compliance test. Where a case cannot be resolved without a tribunal Hearing or it turns out that the turnover test should have been passed, the application must be subjected to the compliance test. General guidance about the conduct of appeals hearings is available in the Appeals, Reviews and Tribunals Guidance (ARTG8200). Note that once an appeal is received against the failure of either the business or turnover test, then you must also request an ‘Information only’ TTQT (see CISR43160 ). This is so that you can see whether the applicant also passes the compliance test. Any failures of the compliance test identified can then be brought to the applicant’s notice, and may inform the applicant as to whether they wish to continue with their appeal. If they do then appeal you must take into account the compliance test, gross payment status cannot be granted unless all the tests have been properly considered. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48040
CISR48040 - Appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status - Logging a Tax Treatment Appeal | CISR48000 | Information guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|—————————-| All appeals against Tax Treatment must be made by the subcontractor or their authorised agent in writing, within 30 days of the notice to change the tax treatment status of the subcontractor (CIS308). There is also a provision to allow for a late appeal to be accepted either by HMRC (see ARTG2240), or by the Tribunal (see ARTG8200). It is important that all appeals received are logged on CISR on the day they are received by HMRC. The reason for this is that where gross tax treatment is withdrawn from the subcontractor; the priority logging of the appeal could prevent contractor letters (CIS316) advising of the subcontractor’s change of Tax Treatment to net payment status being issued. These letters are normally issued at day 55 after the Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) was finalised. However, where you receive an appeal against refusal to grant or withdrawal of gross tax treatment, but the appellant has not stated any grounds for their appeal, then the appeal should not be logged on to CIS. Instead, you should write to the customer to ask them to tell us on what grounds they are making their appeal. To log a ‘Tax Treatment Appeal’ you will need to use the role within CISR called CISR Tax Treatment Administrator. It should be noted that where the subcontractor already has an open Tax Treatment appeal, it will not be possible for you to log another Tax Treatment appeal on CISR against the same registration for the subcontractor (example: ‘as sole trader’). Instead you will need to continue working the previous Tax Treatment appeal. CISR will automatically issue an acknowledgement of the appeal (CIS320) to both the subcontractor and the Customer Level Agent where the Customer Level Agent made the appeal (see CISR19020 for further information regarding Customer Level Agents), or to the subcontractor only where the subcontractor made the appeal. Where the appeal is made by a third party (for example, the subcontractor’s spouse) the appeal acknowledgement will still go to the subcontractor, except where the spouse has been set up as a Customer Level Agent following the submission of an authority (form 64-8 or FBI 2) from the subcontractor. CISR will also create a work item on the PEGA system for every appeal logged, and you will need to take action regarding this work item depending on how the subcontractor’s appeal is to be treated. See CISR48600 onwards for the various actions possible, and see also CISR95640 regarding the action to take on the work item. See also CISR48630 for the action guide which tells you how to log a Tax Treatment appeal. Where the appeal is being logged at the CT CIS Centre Newcastle, after logging the appeal you should carry out an initial check on CISR to see if there is an Employer Compliance Review (ECR) open (this is visible in ‘View Customer’ under the Contractor Scheme). Where there is an ECR open, you should liase with the Employer Compliance Officer (ECO) carrying out the ECR to inform them that you have a Tax Treatment appeal for the company, and see whether; the ECO wishes to work the Tax Treatment appeal as part of their ECR if not, have they identified any Compliance failures which can be taken into account when working the Tax Treatment appeal Where you wish to re-open a Tax Treatment appeal because the subcontractor has now reneged from an earlier agreement, please follow the information panel at CISR48060 , and the action guide at CISR48640 . In the event that a second Tax Treatment appeal is received where one is already ‘open’, you will not be able to log this on to the system, instead you should make a note of its receipt against the original Tax Treatment appeal using the [Add notes] button (See Step 6 of CISR48630 ). Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48050
CISR48050 - Appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status - working a Tax Treatment appeal | CISR48600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| When working a Tax Treatment appeal you will need to use the Tax Treatment Administrator role in CIS to view the Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) results in ‘View Customer’ (See CISR90170 ) and you will also need to access other systems such as Self-Assessment (SA), COTAX, EBS, BROCS (up to 5 April 2013) and ETMP (from 6 April 2013), in order to confirm the failures TTQT has found. Where the appeal has been logged NIC&EO Longbenton, you should carry out an initial check on CISR to see if there is an Employer Compliance Review (ECR) open (this is visible in ‘View Customer’ under the Contractor Scheme). Where there is an ECR open, you should liase with the Employer Compliance Officer (ECO) carrying out the ECR to inform them that you have a Tax Treatment appeal for the individual or partner, and see whether; the ECO wishes to work the Tax Treatment appeal as part of their ECR if not, have they identified any Compliance failures which can be taken into account when working the Tax Treatment appeal Where the failures identified during the TTQT occurred prior to 6April 2007, you may also need to consider whether these specific failures could be regarded as being ‘Minor or Technical’ (See CISR46080 ) in nature. Note however, that the ‘Minor or Technical’ rule cannot be applied to any failures arising after 5April 2007. Role of the Decision Maker The decision maker is not the person who logs the TTQT appeal, but will be the person who examines the grounds of the appeal being made by the appellant. The decision maker will select the appeal through the Work Management system (PEGA) and attempt to progress the appeal as follows: Uphold the Appeal The decision maker accepts the grounds of the appeal; it is assumed here that sufficient information has been submitted to enable you to fully consider the appeal. The Tax Treatment appeal should be determined under TMA70/S54 immediately in favour of the appellant by using the function ‘Maintain TT Appeal’. The action to take on determining the appeal can be found within the Action Guide at CISR48660 . Once this function has been completed the system will issue a CIS320 (Appeal Outcome Letter) to the subcontractor and will only send form CIS316 to the contractors where the type of Tax Treatment appeal was either at initial registration for gross payment status for CIS, or where Gross Tax treatment had been withdrawn without 90 days’ notice ( CISR43040 ). The reason that CIS316 forms are not issued for subcontractors who previously held gross payment status but who went through a Scheduled Review ( CISR49000 ) is that following determination of the appeal in their favour, gross Tax Treatment for the subcontractor would already have been restored by CISR at the stage when their tax treatment appeal had originally been logged. Where the appeal is logged and determined on the same day, only the determination letter will be issued. This is because the system will issue only one letter per scheme per day, containing all decisions made on that day. Action should also be taken to clear the Tax Treatment appeal work item from PEGA. Tax Treatment Appeal received requiring further consideration If an appeal requires further information before it can be considered, the appellant should be contacted to obtain this information. It is likely that these enquiries will focus on the grounds for the appeal. The allowable grounds are; reasonable excuse, HMRC admin’ error and ‘other’. Reasonable Excuse - It should be remembered that whether a customer has a reasonable excuse will depend on the particular circumstances in which the failure or irregularity occurred, as well as the particular circumstances and abilities of the customer who has failed to meet their tax obligations. See CISR81020 which provides an overview of what can be accepted as a reasonable excuse. The customer should also have taken action to remedy the situation as soon as possible after the ‘reasonable excuse’ had expired. HMRC Admin’ Error - This might apply where it is established that there has been a failure of a system or a clerical error to process information within the time frame allowed, or the information received has been incorrectly processed. Other - If the grounds submitted are not fitting to either ‘reasonable excuse’ or ‘HMRC admin’ error’, you should select ‘Other’. The status of the appeal should be left as ‘Received’ in CISR and any relevant notes made using the [Maintain TT Appeal] function. In response to your enquiries the appellant may supply information in support of the appeal resulting in an agreement being reached for settlement without the appeal being subject to either an internal review or being heard by a Tribunal. The function [Maintain TT Appeal] should then be used to determine the appeal under TMA70/S54. Action should also be taken to update the notes on the Tax Treatment appeal work item within PEGA. HMRC decision Upheld Where you uphold HMRC’s decision, the appellant should be informed in writing together with the reasons for that decision (this is known as the decision letter). You should set out in the decision letter, the specific failures found, the legislation which governs this area, and the tolerances that HMRC are allowed to apply as set out in Table 3 of Regulation 32 SI2005/2045 (see CISR46080 ). The appellant should be offered an internal review of the matter by sending with your letter the ‘request for review of decision’ form to the appellant. There is a template letter for both the decision letter and the ‘request for review of decision’ form that you can use available in SEES under ‘Forms and Letters’ (you will need to install the Employer Compliance and Construction Industry SEES package to be able to access these). The appellant should be allowed 30 days to take up the offer of an internal review, or to notify the appeal to the tribunal (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) . At the same time the status of the appeal should be updated on the CISR record to ‘Withdrawal invited’ using [Maintain TT Appeal] and the appeal [Notes] button. The decision maker should, at this stage, clear the Tax Treatment appeal work item from PEGA as ‘Complete’, and you will need to use a spreadsheet held centrally at NIC&EO Longbenton (for individuals and partnerships) and the CT CIS Centre Newcastle (for companies) in order to monitor the various timeframes for the appellant to ask for an internal review, or to notify an appeal to the tribunal. Appellant does not respond to the offer of review Where the appellant does not take up the offer of review, or does not notify the appeal to the tribunal within the time limit, the appeal is treated as determined under TMA70/S54 along the lines of the decision given in the decision letter (see ARTG2700). The Tax Treatment will revert to net at the original specified date where the decision is in favour of HMRC. Where, however, there are fewer than 30 days remaining before that date, or the original specified date has already passed, a new date for the change to net will be set for 30 days hence. At the same time, the status of the appeal should be updated on the CISR record to ‘Withdrawn’ using [Maintain TT Appeal] and the appeal [Notes] button. Top of page Role of the Review Officer Appellant takes up the offer of an internal review. The appellant will notify their take-up of an internal review using the ‘request for review’ form (already pre-addressed) sent to the appellant with the decision letter by the decision maker. The review officer will call for the appeal papers from the decision maker in order to carry out the internal review. They will also consider whether an extension to the 45 day time limit for carrying out an internal review for the case will be required by agreement with the appellant (see ARTG4600). The review officer will carry out the internal review of the appeal and notify the customer either within the 45 day time limit (or any other extended time limit agreed between the review officer and the appellant) and issue a review conclusion letter setting out the HMRC final view of the matter (see ARTG4800). If the review officer upholds HMRC’s decision, the appellant then has the option to notify the appeal to the tribunal within 30 days if they still disagree with the HMRC view of the appeal. If they do not reply, then the appeal should be determined under TMA70/S54 in line with HMRC’s decision (see ARTG2700) 30 days after the issue of the review conclusion letter, (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) . If they reply that they accept the conclusion of the internal review then the appeal should be determined immediately under TMA70/S54 in favour of HMRC (see ARTG2700). The reviewing office will need to use a monitoring system of all internal reviews requested, so that the timeframes for the review are strictly adhered to, and that action is taken to determine the appeal under TMA70/S54 if the appellant does not reply to the review conclusion letter, or does not notify the appeal to the tribunal. Note; The subcontractor having made an appeal to HMRC, may notify the appeal to the tribunal at any time except during the period where they have taken up the offer of an internal review and until the conclusion of that review. Top of page Role of the Tribunals Caseworker Appellant notifies appeal to the Tribunal If an appellant does not agree with the conclusions of the internal review, they can appeal direct to the Tribunal Service (ARTG8200) within 30 days of the conclusion of the internal review. They can also appeal direct to the Tribunal Service after they have made an appeal to HMRC but this must be within 30 days of the issue of the decision letter if they have not taken up the offer of an internal review. You will know that an appeal has been notified to the tribunal through the HMRC Clearing House, as they will contact the Tribunals caseworker who will be based in one of the Appeal Units who will then call for the Tax Treatment appeal papers from the decision maker and the review officer (where there has been an internal review). The Tribunal caseworker will prepare the case for the Tribunal hearing. For more information on the role of the Tribunal caseworker, see the guidance at ARTG8300. However, you should note that, for CIS Tax Treatment appeals, it will not be necessary for the Tribunals Caseworker to send an HMRC statement of case to the Tribunals Service in advance of the hearing (see ARTG8300). The case will proceed straight to an oral hearing at a mutually agreeable date to all parties. At the same time as you are aware that the contractor has notified the appeal to the Tribunal the status of the appeal should be updated on the CISR record to ‘Listed for Personal Hearing’ using [Maintain TT Appeal] and using the appeal [Notes] button. Top of page Following the Tribunal hearing The tribunal will then decide that the appeal should be either Upheld and action taken to restore (or grant) gross tax treatment Not Upheld. The appeal administrator will need to use the function ‘Maintain TT Appeal’ to record the final appeal status. See the Action Guide at CISR48700 for further information and also CISR48070 which gives advice on the different appeal determination options. Once this function has been completed the system will issue a CIS320 (Appeal Outcome Letter) and will only send form CIS316 to the contractors where the type of Tax Treatment appeal was either at initial registration for CIS, or where Gross Tax treatment had been withdrawn without 90 days notice ( CISR43040 ). The reason that a CIS316 is not issued for other cases, is that on logging a Tax Treatment appeal, gross Tax Treatment for the subcontractor would already have been restored at that stage. When the Tax Treatment appeal is settled and where the subcontractor retains gross payment status as a result of that appeal, then the date of the next tax treatment (Scheduled) review (See CISR49000 ) originally set will be maintained. The exception to this however, is where that review date is less than 90 days in the future or is in the past, in these circumstances CISR will automatically reset the date for 90 days in the future from the date the Tax Treatment appeal was determined. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48060
CISR48060 - Appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status - Re-opening a Tax Treatment appeal | CISR48600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| An appeal may need to be re-opened. For example, A subcontractor makes an appeal against the refusal to grant gross payment status. After contact by the decision maker the subcontractor either agrees to withdraw their appeal in writing, and goes on to do so, or does not respond to the decision letter within the 30 day time limit. If, later on, the subcontractor wishes to pursue their Tax Treatment appeal (and provided that not more than 30 days have lapsed since the decision letter), they will then wish for their appeal to remain open. However, once 30 days have passed following the withdrawal of the appeal or the decision letter, the matter becomes final (see ARTG2700). Alternatively, a subcontractor may have a Tax Treatment appeal determined at either a First Tier or Upper Tribunal hearing in their favour, or in favour of HMRC. HMRC, or the subcontractor, may feel that the decision was wrong in law, and may ask for permission to appeal to either the Upper Tribunal or the relevant appellate court (See CISR48180 ). In that case the Tax Treatment appeal will need to be re-opened in CISR. You should note that once 30 days have passed from the TMA70/S54 agreement the matter becomes final and conclusive as if the matter had been decided by the tribunal (see ARTG2700), unless the subcontractor can show that they had a ‘reasonable excuse’ (see CISR81020 ) for making a late request for the appeal to be re-opened. To re-open a ‘Tax Treatment Appeal’ you will need to use the role within CISR called CISR Tax Treatment Administrator. CISR will recognise when the circumstances exist when a tax treatment appeal could be re-opened (for example, where there is a recently closed appeal logged in CISR already) and will automatically present you with the ‘Re-open Appeal’ button when you select the ‘Maintain Tax Treatment Appeal’ function from the CIS Main menu. The action guide at CISR48640 explains this in more detail. Note. Where a tax treatment appeal is re-opened, CIS does not automatically issue an acknowledgement to the appellant on the request to re-open the tax treatment appeal. A manual acknowledgement to such a request should therefore be considered. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48070
CISR48070 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status: Description of the different status types of Tax Treatment Appeal In the ‘Appeal Details’ window there is a drop-down menu alongside ‘Appeal Progress’ which describes the various types of status that you could allocate to an appeal. Not all of the status types will be shown at the same time in this drop-down menu. What is available in the drop-down menu will depend on the status of the appeal at the time you access this window. To help you, all of the stages of an appeal are shown below, with a brief description of what each one means and the selection to be used from the CIS system drop-down menu when the appeal has reached that stage. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48080
CISR48080 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status: preparation for Tribunal hearings | CISR48600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The key to defending your decision to refuse gross payment status is good preparation before the tribunal Hearing. With Tax Treatment appeals to the tribunal, the Tribunal caseworker is not normally required to send an HMRC statement of case to the Tribunal service (see ARTG8380). The appeal will normally simply go forward to an oral hearing; You should, in all cases, use BROCS (for employer payments up to 5 April 2013), or ETMP (for employer payments from 6 April 2013), COTAX and or SA to prepare a detailed schedule of payments, SA or COTAX returns, contractor monthly returns or employer returns to cover all payments and returns that became due in the qualifying period prior to the application, or scheduled review. This should have already have been done at the decision maker stage, so that the appellant has full information on what information we have used to make our decision. You should also prepare a schedule of payments and obligations due since the end of the qualifying period that is under appeal to show at the Tribunal hearing whether the appellant has met their obligations on time since that date, and therefore whether the ‘reason to expect’ test (see CISR46100 ) is also passed. Schedule of payments/delays It is important that the appellant and their representative know the case they have to meet. It is part of the rules of natural justice. It follows, therefore, that any schedules or evidence must be given to them in advance of the tribunal hearing. Please also bear in mind any claims made by the subcontractor as part of their appeal regarding acquiescence by HMRC; the tax case (EWHC 1294) of John Cormack v CBL Cable Contractors Ltd refers. This case revolved around PAYE payments being made late, where payment cheques were being collected late by HMRC. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48090
CISR48090 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status: the Tribunal Hearing | CISR48600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| All general matters relating to the tribunal are dealt with in the Appeals, Reviews and Tribunals Guidance at ARTG2400 onwards. The following brings out particular points of relevance against the refusal to grant gross payment status. If the appellant decides to notify the appeal to the tribunal either without, or after conclusion of, an internal review, HMRC will be notified of this through the HMRC Clearing House and the Appeal Unit will be notified of the appeal to the tribunal and the Tribunal Caseworker will examine the case prior to the Hearing (see ARTG8430). It will be the responsibility of the review office to prepare the appeal brief for the Tribunal Hearing, even where no review was undertaken. In a company case where an individual director or beneficial shareholder is a consideration in the grounds for refusal the Tribunal Caseworker should write to the company secretary, asking that each director (and where the company is close, each beneficial shareholder) be made aware of the appeal and told that their tax affairs may be referred to at the Tribunal Hearing each director or beneficial shareholder whose record forms part of the grounds for refusal, stating the part their affairs play in the grounds for refusal any agent acting for the relevant director or shareholder stating that you intend to introduce information about their client at the proceedings. See also the guidance at CISR48120 for appeals involving evidence arising from FA04/S64(5), and the issue of a summons to appear at a Tribunal Hearing to the pertinent directors and shareholders of the company. When an application for gross payment status is refused, the applicant may appeal to HMRC within 30 days of the notice of refusal (CIS308) and, following that, can either ask for an internal review (see ARTG4000) of the matter, or can notify the appeal to the tribunal (see ARTG2400). Gross payment status must be refused to an applicant if the available evidence shows that the applicant does not satisfy all the conditions necessary to allow HMRC to grant gross payment status, in particular Table 3 in Regulation 32 SI2005/2045 details the tolerances that HMRC are allowed to apply in allowing gross payment status to continue (see CISR46080 ). For example, if the turnover test is failed, the matter is a question of fact and the tribunal will decide whether the evidence is strong enough to support HMRC’s refusal. You should be prepared to explain the operation of the turnover test used and the figures in your case. You should supply the appellant and the tribunal with a copy of the turnover test figures as shown on the application form and your calculation on paper. It is also important to show that all of the gross payment status tests (Business, Turnover and Compliance) are passed or failed where the appeal is for example, about the turnover test only. The tribunal may make a judgment on ‘any relevant’ decision reached by the decision maker in coming to the conclusion that a refusal was appropriate. This means that they can decide that the evidence presented does, or does not, justify the conclusion that the applicant has failed to satisfy a qualifying condition or fulfil a tax obligation. In the presentation of a case you should draw particular attention to those factors which you consider to be most serious and the main grounds for the decision to refuse gross payment status. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48100
CISR48100 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status: subcontractor claims cash flow difficulties | CISR48600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Very rarely, you might find that the tribunal appears to be sympathetic towards businesses that pay late because of cash flow difficulties caused by the subcontractor’s clients being late with their payments. In order to counter this natural sympathy it is often helpful to know why a subcontractor was unable to make specific payments of tax by their due dates. Cash-flow problems are generally only accepted as a ‘reasonable excuse’ where the subcontractor could clearly demonstrate that this was due to the unexpected failure of one or more of their contractors’ businesses or sudden difficulty in arranging finance, where the general background was one of good compliance. Where a subcontractor has missed a payment, or payments after 1 June 2008, and claims, as a reasonable excuse, that it was due to cash-flow problems, you can take a more sympathetic view where the subcontractor has some evidence of general financing difficulties, and has had a reasonably good payment record, prior to that date. We suggest that you should ask the appellant to provide evidence in mitigation and, in particular, enquire as to why they were not able to obtain short term authorised borrowing to meet their obligations on time. If the reason is that the bank was unwilling to lend the necessary amounts, then it may demonstrate that there is doubt that the business will be likely to comply with its obligations in the future, this should be brought out during any tribunal hearing. Subcontractor claims they cannot survive with ‘Net payment status’. Alternative to the above, appellants may argue that with low profit margins in construction, the issue of net payment status and resulting deduction undermines their cash flow and that the deduction bears no relation to the company’s ultimate CT liability. In order to address this issue, the legislation was changed from 6 April 2002 by FA02/S40 (now FA04/S62) to allow subcontractor companies to offset their CIS deductions against their monthly/quarterly PAYE, NIC and other liabilities for 2002-03 onwards. However, it is clear that many company subcontractors are still not aware of the help given to companies who have deductions made from their CIS income. For a company that previously held gross payment status it will help the tribunal if you prepare a schedule showing how minimal the effects of the company’s loss of gross payment status might actually be. Where you decide to take this approach, you should agree the schedule with the subcontractor company, or its agent, before the Hearing takes place. In many cases, the projected CIS deductions will be less than a company’s monthly PAYE/CIS liabilities and therefore any adverse cash flow would be minimal or non-existent. But, setting the information out in a table as suggested above enables you to show far more easily how minimal the effects of losing gross payment status would be on a company’s cash flow position. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48110
CISR48110 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status: Subcontractor claims that suspicious activity has taken place on their Self-Assessment record | CISR48600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Where a subcontractor either loses or is refused gross payment status following a Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT), and the subcontractor disputes the details on their Self Assessment (SA) record, for example, the amount of repayments claimed or the amount of their Self-Assessment, you should initially check SA notes to see whether this has already been reported to the Self-Assessment Record Protection team. If this is the case you should inform the customer that you will investigate the matter, and you should contact the Self-Assessment Record Protection team to ascertain the progress of the case. If however there is no note on SA and you feel that suspicious activity may have taken place on the record, you should send full details to the Self-Assessment Record Protection team, including the fact that currently you have an appeal against a decision to either remove or to grant gross payment status for the Construction Industry Scheme to the subcontractor. This report should be made to a dedicated work area mailbox that can be found in the Global Address List (GAL) (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Where the Self-Assessment Record Protection Team confirm that suspicious activity has taken place, and you can now see that the genuine subcontractor had in fact made the payments that they are due to make and fulfilled all of their obligations under the Taxes Acts on time, you may uphold the appeal in favour of the subcontractor and they may retain (or be granted) gross payment status. You should check to see whether a new Self-Assessment record has been opened following your report, and if it has whether the genuine subcontractor has been registered for CIS using their new Unique Taxpayer reference (UTR). If so, check what payment status has currently been allocated to the subcontractor, if they are shown as being on net payment, you may now allocate gross payment by using the function ‘Change TT’ as described at the bottom of CISR43630 where you are satisfied that the Compliance Test is passed following the report from the Self-Assessment Record Protection team. Where a new Self-Assessment record has not been opened, you will need to arrange for this to be done and then to register the subcontractor for CIS under the new UTR using the registration details from the old UTR, and allocate gross payment status to the subcontractor on the new record by using the function ‘Change TT’ as described at the bottom of CISR43630 . The subcontractor must also be advised to inform their contractor(s) of their new UTR, and that the contractor(s) should re-verify the subcontractor using that new UTR. Once a new UTR is opened and you have upheld the subcontractors appeal on the old CIS record, you will also need to go back to the CIS record held under the old UTR and use function ‘Change TT’ to change the tax treatment back to Net, this is so that the person now using that record has payments made under deduction at 20% and not under gross payment. Note; CIS316’s will automatically be issued to the various contractor(s) involved with the old UTR, so the genuine subcontractor will need to have already asked their contractor(s) to re-verify them under their new UTR if they are to avoid having deductions made at 20%. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48120
CISR48120 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status: appeals involving evidence arising from S64(5) | CISR48600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| In most cases the refusal to grant gross payment status will arise from factors relating to the company’s own circumstances of compliance. It may have insufficient turnover or have defaulted on its tax obligations, for instance. In these cases there is no confidentially issue in the presentation of evidence. However, where evidence supporting the refusal of a company application for gross payment status derives from a direction made under FA04/S64(5), the Tribunal caseworker may need to present evidence which relates to the confidential affairs of one or more directors of the company. This raises issues of confidentially where the hearing is attended by a number of company officers and their representatives. In this situation, the Tribunal caseworker should ask the tribunal whether the qualifying conditions of particular directors or shareholders may be considered separately. This is to preserve the confidentially of the individual taxpayer’s affairs. If the tribunal agrees, and the appellants raise no objection, bear in mind that someone representing the company still needs to be present at all stages of the hearing. If you consider that fully demonstrating the failings of absent directors or shareholders is crucial to your case, you should advise the Tribunal Service of this and request that these persons be summoned to allow those individuals to be present at a future tribunal hearing. Those persons being summoned by the tribunal have the option to have the summons set aside if they did not have the opportunity to object to it before it was made or issued. If this happens or if the Tribunal refuse to issue a summons, or the appellants object to your proposal, you may proceed with the appeal subject to the following consideration where the refusal is based wholly or partly on the failings of directors or shareholders who are not present (or professionally represented) at the hearing. You may only refer to the circumstances of such directors or shareholders in general terms. They should not be named since they have not had the opportunity to object to the discussion of their affairs in a wider hearing. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48130
CISR48130 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status: cases involving special difficulty (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48140
CISR48140 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status: penalty appeals | CISR48600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Chapter 3 of FA04/S72 provides for penalties to be charged where an applicant registering for gross payment status or payment under deduction knowingly or recklessly makes a false statement. Where a notice refusing gross payment status and a notice charging a penalty for false statements have both been issued and the applicant appeals against both it is to be hoped that the Tribunals Service will be able to make arrangements for the related appeals to be heard at the same tribunal Hearing. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48150
CISR48150 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status: witnesses | CISR48600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| In all cases, you are strongly advised to send the appellant (if a company, the Company Secretary) and their agent before the date of the Hearing a letter setting out the details of the case the facts that will be relied on details of the relevant legislation. Ideally, this should be done at the decision maker stage (see CISR48050 ). If any of this evidence (for example, the date a payment was made, or the date a tax return was received) is to be disputed, then witnesses must be called to speak about those facts. This evidence may be supplied by the Debt and Management Banking office a Special Compliance Office investigator an Employer Compliance officer from a Construction Industry Team. Where this evidence forms the whole or a substantial part of the evidence on which the refusal decision was made, the relevant officer should be called as a witness at the appeal hearing (see ARTG8600). It is sometimes helpful to ask the witness to set out their evidence in a statement that can be given to the appellant and their agent in advance of the Hearing. Remember that a failure to disclose evidence or other facts, upon which the case hinges, will inevitably result in the postponement of the hearing so that the evidence in question can be considered fully by the tribunal. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48160
CISR48160 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status: right of appeal | CISR48600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| An applicant may appeal against a decision to refuse a gross payment application within 30 days from the date of the notice of refusal or cancellation (FA04/S67). The appeal must be made in writing to HMRC and must specify the grounds for the appeal. Once that has been done, the appellant can request an internal review of the matter, or can notify the appeal to the tribunal provided that an internal review is not in progress which has not been concluded (see ARTG4600). An appeal may be settled by agreement between HMRC and the appellant (see ARTG 2700) before an internal review or a tribunal hearing. This is preferable as it can save time and effort for all involved. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48170
CISR48170 - Register and maintain subcontractor: Appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status: HMRC action after losing an appeal | CISR48600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Even though you have fully prepared your case there will still be occasions where the tribunal overturns your decision and upholds the subcontractor’s appeal. When this happens, you should thoroughly review the whole case, and, if possible, ask a colleague of G7 or above to do this with you. You will need to question whether or not the case was correct in all aspects and if the tribunal decision was right on the facts of the case as presented to them. In any case where there is any likelihood that you may wish to seek the tribunal’s permission to appeal against its decision, you should apply to the tribunal for a copy of its full written findings and reasons for its decision if you have only been provided with a summary of the decision, see ARTG8920. You must obtain the tribunal’s full written findings and reasons before making any application to the tribunal to appeal against its decision. In any case where you consider the decision of the tribunal to be wrong in law, it is important that you should follow the guidance in the Appeals, Reviews and Tribunals Guidance at ARTG8900 onwards and report the matter to the CIS Advisory Team. Your report should set out all the facts, the points at issue and the arguments advanced on both sides. You should make your report as quickly as possible as HMRC must make an application to appeal against the tribunal decision within 56 days of the date the tribunal sent you its full written findings of fact and the reasons for its decision (ARTG8990). Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr48180
CISR48180 - Appeals against refusal or cancellation of Gross Payment Status - Appeals against a First Tier or Upper Tribunal decision | CISR48600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Where there is the possibility of an appeal against a decision of either the First Tier or Upper Tribunal (whether by HMRC or the subcontractor) you may need to take further action on CISR whilst this is awaited depending on the payment status of the applicant. For example: Subcontractor held net payment status at the time the application is made Where a subcontractor makes an application for gross payment status and the application is refused by HMRC because of compliance failures, where the applicant appeals against that decision and the tribunal decides to uphold that appeal in the subcontractor’s favour, if HMRC is then given permission to appeal against the tribunal decision, even though further action is being taken with regard to the appeal, you must give gross payment status to the subcontractor as soon as possible after the first tier tribunal’s original decision, the Action Guide at CISR48710 describes how to do this. Where a subcontractor submits an appeal against refusal to grant gross payment status and the tribunal finds in favour of HMRC and dismisses the subcontractor’s appeal, if the subcontractor is given permission to appeal against the first tier tribunal decision the subcontractor will remain on net payment status. Top of page Subcontractor held gross payment status at the time the Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) was carried out HMRC decides to appeal against the tribunal decision If the subcontractor submits an appeal against the loss of gross payment status and the tribunal finds in favour of the subcontractor, then gross Tax Treatment would be retained by the subcontractor pending the outcome of any appeal against the tribunal decision by HMRC. Where you are authorised to ask for permission to appeal against an Upper Tribunal decision, and following a court hearing the judge finds in favour of HMRC, if you are already beyond 90 days since the original refusal of gross payment status, a further 30 days from the date of the judgement should be allowed before notifying the relevant contractors that net payment status is to be applied to the subcontractor. This is to allow time for any further appeal against that decision to be made by the subcontractor. The subcontractor decides to appeal against the tribunal decision If the subcontractor submits an appeal against the loss of gross payment status and the tribunal finds in favour of HMRC and dismisses the subcontractor’s appeal, then gross Tax Treatment would be re-instated for the subcontractor at the time the appeal was logged, and would be retained if the subcontractor is given permission to appeal against the first tier tribunal decision. In most cases the subcontractor will accept the decision but if they believe that the tribunal have erred in law they can ask for permission to appeal to the Upper Tier. Where a subcontractor asks for a full written decision so that they can consider whether an appeal is appropriate, gross payment should not be removed until the time limits for asking for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal have expired. Written reasons for the tribunal decision You should note that the tribunal has up to 28 days after the date of the tribunal hearing to supply full written reasons for the decision it has made to both the appellant and HMRC (if it has not already done so). Once a full written decision has been provided to each party, they will then both have 56 days in which to apply for permission to appeal against that decision (these cases are expected to be few in number). Where you are unsure whether a full written decision has been provided by the tribunal to each party, you should seek advice from the CIS Advisory Team following a tribunal decision in favour of HMRC. You should therefore wait for 56 days after the date the full written reasons for the decision made by the tribunal have been provided to both parties before you take any action to remove gross payment status from the subcontractor where the tribunal has found in favour of HMRC, by changing the status of the appeal on CIS (as set out in CISR48700 ) to ‘upheld in favour of HMRC’. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr49600
CISR49600 - Register and maintain subcontractor: scheduled review: contents CISR49610 Finalising an ‘Incomplete’ scheduled review TTQT - introduction CISR49620 Finalising an ‘Incomplete’ scheduled review TTQT - sole traders CISR49630 Finalising an ‘Incomplete’ scheduled review TTQT - partners in a partnership CISR49640 Finalising an ‘Incomplete’ scheduled review TTQT - companies Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr49010
CISR49010 - Register and maintain subcontractor: scheduled review: introduction | CISR49600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Scheduled or Ongoing Review are names for a periodic test a subcontractor must pass to retain gross payment status under CIS. This section of the guidance covers how the test is applied; its interaction with the Tax Treatment Qualifying Test (TTQT) and related issues. Particular areas covered are how the test is applied against subcontractor records how a subcontractor currently on gross payment status can have their gross payment status withdrawn explanation of the test and terms used. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr49020
CISR49020 - Register and maintain subcontractor: scheduled review: explanation of scheduled review | CISR49600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Scheduled or Ongoing Review is the annual Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) which is carried out automatically against all current subcontractor records (except for Trust subcontractors) holding gross payment status. This process started from October 2007. The scheduled review runs once during a 12 month period, to confirm whether or not the subcontractor is meeting allof their obligations under the Taxes Acts, and that they may therefore continue to hold gross payment status under CIS. Where, however, the subcontractor is a Trust, the Scheduled Review will not run automatically and a manual review will be carried out instead each year for the Trust subcontractor. (This content has been withheld because of exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act 2000) The areas that will be tested under the Scheduled Review will be the same as for the Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) (see the guidance at CISR43070 for a full explanation of these). For a company subcontractor the Scheduled Review will only look at the Compliance of the company itself and not at the compliance of the Directors or Shareholders of the company. For Partnerships, all the partners registered for CIS who hold gross payment status will have the same scheduled review date (this will include any new partners admitted to the business since the last scheduled review). The Scheduled Review for the partners in a Partnership will look at not only the compliance of the Partnership itself, but the compliance of all of the partners in the business as well. The Scheduled Review will not take place at the same time each year for each subcontractor as cases are selected for Scheduled Review by the computer randomly. So, for example, in 2008-09 the Scheduled Review might take place in October 2008, in 2009-10 it might take place in September 2009, and for 2010-11 it could take place again in August or September 2010. However in all cases the scheduled review will look back at the last 12 months (the ‘qualifying period’) to see whether the subcontractor has met all of their obligations during that period. Note: You should not get drawn into any discussions with the subcontractor as to when the Scheduled Review will be carried out. It is sufficient to advise that this will be at least once in any 12 month period. Where CIS detects that a subcontractor has made some compliance failures since the last Scheduled Review was undertaken, (for example, four consecutive late monthly contractor returns have been submitted), the Scheduled Review will be run by the computer automatically at an earlier time than otherwise it would have, had these failures not occurred (this is known as the ‘System Ad-hoc TTQT (see CISR43140 ). To undertake a manual TTQT please refer to the guidance at CISR43070 which will direct you to the relevant guidance depending upon whether the subcontractor is an individual, a partner in a partnership or a company. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr49030
CISR49030 - Register and maintain subcontractor: scheduled review: Finalising an ‘Incomplete’ scheduled review TTQT Once a Scheduled Review has taken place, and the result from the Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) is a “Fail”, the case will first be generated onto an ‘Incomplete’ TTQT worklist. There are two separate worklists - one for Self-Assessment subcontractors and another for Corporation Tax subcontractors. Responsibility for these worklists falls as follows; From the worklist, a manual check is first carried out on the case to confirm that the failure reasons already found by the computer are valid. Before the TTQT can be finalised as a ‘fail’ for a subcontractor who already holds gross payment status, you will need to find out from the subcontractor the reasons why the identified failure(s) occurred (the action guide at CISR49610 explains how to do this). This is so that you can establish whether or not the subcontractor had a ‘reasonable excuse’ (see CISR81020 ) for the failure(s), and this will allow you to decide whether or not gross payment status should be withdrawn in this instance. The guidance to follow for each typwe of subcontractor is set out in the action guides in the table below; If you consider that the reasons for the failures do not amount to a ‘reasonable excuse’, or the subcontractor does not respond to your enquiry, you may confirm the TTQT result as a ‘fail’ by using the function ‘Manage TTQT’ (see CISR43600 ). When confirming the result as a ‘fail’ you must ensure that none of the failures identified by TTQT are now more than 12 months before the date you are finalising the TTQT. Any failures that are more than 12 months old should be made ‘Not active’. This may result in the failures now being within the exceptions allowed for in SI2005/2045 reg 32, in which case the TTQT will now ‘pass’ and gross payment status may continue until the next annual review. Newcastle Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr49040
CISR49040 - Register and maintain subcontractor: scheduled review: withdrawal of gross payment status | CISR49600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| When a Scheduled Review has taken place, and the result from the Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) is confirmed as a “Fail”, the subcontractor will be notified by the issue of form CIS308 that they will lose their gross payment status 90 days after the issue of the notice. A copy of this notice will also be sent to the subcontractor’s Customer Level Agent (See CISR19020 for more information about Customer Level Agents). If no appeal has been made by the subcontractor before day 55 after the notification of the change of payment status, all contractors who have paid or verified the subcontractor within the last two years will be notified on form CIS316 that the subcontractor’s tax treatment is to be changed from “gross” to “net” from a date which will be 90 days after the issue of the CIS308. See also the guidance at CISR49050 regarding Scheduled Review and appeals against withdrawal of gross payment status. See also CISR43000 for more detailed guidance on the changing of a subcontractor’s payment status from gross to net before the scheduled review date, and CISR48000 for the handling of an appeal by the subcontractor against the withdrawal of (or refusal to grant) gross payment status. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr49050
CISR49050 - Register and maintain subcontractor: scheduled review: appeals against withdrawal of gross payment status | CISR49600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Following a Scheduled Review, a subcontractor who has been notified that their gross payment status is to be removed will have the statutory period of 30 days in which to appeal against this decision. However if no appeal by the subcontractor has been made at day 55 after the notification of the change of payment status, all contractors who have paid or verified the subcontractor within the last two years will be notified that the subcontractor’s tax treatment is to be changed from “gross” to “net” from a date which will be 90 days after the issue of the CIS308. If a ‘late’ appeal is made by a subcontractor after day 55 and the ‘late’ appeal is accepted, once the appeal is logged the CIS system will automatically cancel the change in the subcontractor’s tax treatment from gross to net and will notify all contractors who have paid or verified the subcontractor within the last two years that the subcontractor’s tax treatment is to remain as “gross”. Where a ‘late’ appeal is made by a subcontractor after the tax treatment has already changed to net (that is, after day 90), and the ‘late’ appeal is accepted, once again, when the appeal is logged the CIS system will automatically change the subcontractor’s tax treatment back from net to gross, and will notify all contractors who have paid or verified the subcontractor within the last two years about the change in tax treatment. See CISR48000 for detailed instructions on the handling of an appeal by the subcontractor against the withdrawal or (refusal to grant) gross payment status. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr49060
CISR49060 - Register and maintain subcontractor: scheduled review: legislation | CISR49600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| The statutory authority for the withdrawal of gross payment status from a subcontractor is contained at FA04/s66 (see CISR16110 for more detail regarding the provisions of this section). The right of appeal against a decision to withdraw gross payment status is conferred to the subcontractor by virtue of FA04/s67 (see CISR16120 for more detail regarding the provisions of this section). Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel
https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/construction-industry-scheme-reform/cisr49070
CISR49070 - Register and maintain subcontractor: scheduled review: Scheduled review and Joint Ventures | CISR49600 | Action guide contents | |—————————————————————————————————–|———————–| Joint Ventures are tested in the same way at Scheduled Review as other types of subcontractor depending upon the way that the joint venture is set up. A Joint Venture that is set up as a partnership and therefore has a record open on Self-Assessment (SA) will not only be tested itself in respect of its own compliance obligations, but the Tax Treatment Qualification Test (TTQT) will also test the partners in the Joint Venture in respect of their compliance obligations, and those partners will therefore be participants in the TTQT. However, if a Joint Venture is set up as a limited company and is therefore set up on COTAX, then the Scheduled Review will not test the compliance of the individual companies that make up the limited company Joint Venture, and TTQT will only look at the compliance obligations of the limited company Joint Venture itself. In deciding whether the Joint Venture can retain gross payment status at Scheduled Review, provided that you are satisfied that the TTQT test participants in the Joint Venture have met their compliance obligations or that they had a ‘reasonable excuse’ ( CISR81020 ) for any failures identified then the ‘Incomplete’ reason ‘Unincorporated body is present’ may be set to a ‘Pass’ using the function ‘Manage TTQT’ as described in CISR43700 . However, note that before confirming a scheduled review as a ‘fail’ you will need to carry out the actions at CISR49030 and ask if the Joint Venture had a ‘reasonable excuse’ for the failures identified. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes No Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab) . Cancel